Global Solutions. An Internet Community Takes On Globalisation


Published electronically
March 2003
Copyright 2003 Westchester Press
Permission hereby freely granted for non-commercial distribution of this work in 
whole or in part provided the source is properly credited.

ISBN 0-9671232-9-1
Westchester Press
2132-J Crossing Way
High Point, NC 27262
(336) 884-1038
Email: Westcpress@aol.com

For information on trade paperback version
(ISBN: 0-595-28067-6):
iUniverse, Inc.
2021 Pine Lake Road, Suite 100
Lincoln, NE 68512
www.iuniverse.com

To contact the editors:
Adriaan Boiten, aboiten@xs4all.nl
Richard Stimson, stimso1@juno.com

 
Contents


Introduction - How This Book Was Written Democratically


CHAPTER 1 - Global Problems in Need of Solution

CHAPTER 2 - Perfecting Democracy in Political Systems

CHAPTER 3 - Restoring Human Control over Corporate Power

CHAPTER 4 - Making Monetary Systems Work to Benefit People

CHAPTER 5 - Democratizing the Communications Media

CHAPTER 6 - The Spiritual Basis for Sustainable Living

CHAPTER 7 - Civil Society and Alternative Life Styles

CHAPTER 8 - Education as an Essential Tool for Finding Solutions

CHAPTER 9 - Summary and Conclusions

CHAPTER 10 - Finding out the Truth

 
About the Editors




Introduction - How This Book Was Written Democratically



The origin of this book is quite unusual. Most books have one author, sometimes 
two, but this book is the product of collaboration by a large number of people 
in many countries participating in an Internet forum.  

Defying the adage that the only piece of good writing by committee was the King 
James Version of the Bible, the members of this forum set out to create a guide 
for reform of government at all levels from global down to local communities. 
They aimed especially to counter global control by financial interests at the 
expense of democratic self-rule.

It all started in August 2000 when the Internet forum "FixGov" was set up for 
collaborative writing on reform of government and continued for over two years, 
ending with publication early in 2003. Many of the participants came from 
another forum called Alternate Culture, and quite a few had responded to an 
invitation at Blue Ear Forum, largely composed of journalists and writers from 
around the world.

The purpose was stated on the FixGov home page as follows:

"Fixing Government: FixGov aims to promote economic, ecological, and social 
justice. We are working on a book about government reform and we hope for ideas 
from many areas of the world. 

The FixGov group exists because all the efforts individuals make for sustainable 
living can be offset by corporate and government decisions. How can local, 
national, and international governments be made answerable to the people they 
govern instead  of just the power elites? When  major polluters of the 
atmosphere use political muscle to escape environmental controls, what can be 
done by the people who have to breathe the polluted air? When municipal sewage 
dumping or industrial waste fouls water that is vital to human health, how can 
people protect themselves? When large-scale corporate agriculture and food 
processing distribute contaminated food and make consumers unknowing guinea pigs 
for genetic modification, radiation, and dangerous substances, how can they be 
subjected to effective control?

Join a discussion seeking ways to overcome the corruption that undermines public 
interest throughout the world, overthrowing or blocking democracy in some 
countries, making voting seem futile to many in the US, and secretly controlling 
such UN agencies as WTO, IMF, and the World Bank. 

Please make a strong effort to base your comments on facts and remember to 
respect the comments of others, as your postings will go straight through 
without screening by a moderator."


Some 70 people joined in this project, including members from the United States, 
Canada, Mexico, United Kingdom, Netherlands, Poland, Sweden, India, Pakistan, 
Bangladesh, Mali, Australia, New Zealand, and possibly other countries (because 
email addresses do not always indicate the country). Messages were exchanged in 
English.

As members contributed their thoughts, a volunteer editor was sought. When 
nobody offered to take on the task, the founders inquired whether one of the 
particularly articulate participants, Adriaan Boiten, would be willing to assume 
the responsibility. He agreed, and in addition created a web site displaying the 
results of the discussion and links to appropriate sources. That web site can 
now be found at www.fixgov.com or www.fixgov.org and is maintained by another 
volunteer, James McGuigan.

At the beginning the discussion on the forum was wide-ranging and random. A 
difference in emphasis emerged between those whose main concern was developing 
more democratic structures in existing governmental units and others who saw 
more hope in small autonomous communities living in harmony with nature and 
sending representatives to bodies that would work out means of cooperation on a 
larger scale. Both approaches are reflected in the resulting book.


As editor, Adriaan Boiten defined the major topics around which he discussion 
continued. Each of the chapters is based on the work of a volunteer who 
summarized the consensus developed in discussions of the forum on one of the 
topics. These summaries were disseminated to the entire group, then revised in 
the light of comments received. Finally, they were embodied in this book, edited 
jointly by Adriaan Boiten and Richard Stimson. Any royalties received from this 
work will be used to further the objectives of the forum. 

As in any forum, some people participated to a greater degree than others, but 
all were able to offer their thoughts and comment on the contributions of 
others. Any objections or disagreements were taken into account when the 
consensus reports were written. The most extensive work was done by the 
volunteers who prepared those reports. Their backgrounds are quite diverse.

Adriaan Boiten, co-editor, engaged in historical preservation for the City of 
Amsterdam for 12 years. He studied new and theoretical history at the Municipal 
University of Amsterdam, graduating in 1986, and performed civic service in the 
library of the International Institute of Social History in lieu of military 
service. As the proprietor of a web design business he lives and works in the 
old inner city of Amsterdam.

Richard Stimson, co-editor, is an author and retired business professor in High 
Point, North Carolina, serving voluntarily as national coordinator of the 
worldwide International Simultaneous Policy Organisation.  Educated at Yale, 
Florida International University, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, his careers have spanned association management, public relations, 
university teaching, and computer operations.  

James McGuigan in England, who set up www.fixgov.org, is working on the Earth 
Emergency Initiative (www.earthemergency.org) and World Future Council 
Initiative (www.worldfuturecouncil.org). He is also a webmaster and a computer 
programmer, currently obtaining his degree on Information Technology  with  the 
Open University. He is an avid contributor of articles to internet forums on a 
diverse range of subjects. 

Peter Scott of New Zealand has contributed ideas for improvement of the layout 
design of the book.

James Hall, summarizer of the consensus on political systems, grew up in a 
family of Republicans, supported Barry Goldwater's presidential campaign and the 
Vietnam war, but gradually migrated to a liberal viewpoint.  A long-time 
resident of Orlando, Florida, he worked 23 years for the Walt Disney Company in 
jobs from ride operator to technical writer. In the 
Transportation/Communications Union at Disney, he served as a shop steward, 
district trustee, and finally as President and Treasurer, representing the 
interests of 3,000 Disney employees. He also was a writer and editor of the 
union's district newsletter for nine years. With a master's degree in liberal 
studies, he has taught at community college, written for The American Partisan 
and several other web magazines, and is collaborating on a book with Ian Foster.

Liane Casten, who (with Stimson) assembled most of the material in the chapter 
on communications media, is an author, journalist, film writer and director. 
Presently she is co-founder and president of Chicago Media Watch, a volunteer 
watchdog group that monitors the media for bias, distortions and omissions, and 
she is working on her second book, an expos‚ of a criminal corporation, 
scheduled for publication in 2002. Her first book, Breast Cancer: Poisons, 
Profits and Prevention (Common Courage Press, 1996), grew out of a cover story 
in Ms. on the environmental connection to the disease. Her articles have also 
been published in E Magazine, The Nation, Mother Jones, Environment Health 
Perspectives, In These Times, Business Ethics, The Chicago Tribune and the 
Chicago Sun-Times. She wrote and directed four documentary films. With an M.A. 
from the University of Chicago, she has also taught high school and college 
classes.

Richard Gauthier, who reported the consensus for the chapter on "The Spiritual 
Basis for Sustainable Living," was born in New Jersey, but has been living in 
Europe since 1986 as a yoga and meditation teacher. In the past five years he 
has worked in Poland on non-profit projects to spread organic farming in Poland 
and protect small farmers regarding Poland's pending membership in the European 
Union. As a member of the Ananda Marga yoga meditation association, founded by 
P. R. Sarkar (who died in 1990), he made several visits to India, became a monk 
and an authority on Sarkar's concept of Microvita. The organization was banned 
in India and its members blacklisted for its anti-capitalist, anti-communist 
socioeconomic philosophy, its anti-corruption stand, and a trumped-up murder 
charge against Sarkar later dismissed in court. To obtain a visa to enter India 
he changed his name legally from Richard F. Gauthier and got a new passport as 
Richard Richardson.

He has also been known as Rudreshananda in India, and has the spiritual name of 
Viveka. Author of a book and many articles about Microvita, he runs several e-
mail lists on various spiritual and scientific topics and can be reached at 
richard@sfo.pl.

William N. "Bill" Ellis, summarizer of the chapters on civil society and on 
education, is a physicist, futurist, farmer working from the home he was born in 
on his farm in Rangeley, Maine, USA, to bring social change and civil 
globalization. He is General Coordinator of TRANET transnational network 
(tranet@rangeley.org) and of A Coalition for Self-Learning, that has recently 
published the book, "Creating Learning Communities," which grew out of his 1998 
E. F. Schumacher Lecture in which he used homeschooling as an example of the 
application of chaos, complexity, and gaian theories in the social sphere. In 
the same lecture he used GrassRoots Organizations (GROs) as subset of Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) as another example of leaderless, unplanned, 
undesigned self-organization and speculated that the phenomenal growth and 
linking of GROs could lead to a radically different form of world governance.


1  

Global Problems in Need of Solution


Global communication is good; global monopoly is bad. Worrying about global 
problems may seem unnecessary to those among us who are fortunate enough to be 
living in a democracy during a period of history that lacks many of the horrors 
of the past. Human sacrifice, cannibalism, slavery, colonial oppression, and 
many diseases are largely (but not entirely) behind us, as are two world wars, 
and it is right to be thankful for the benefits we have.

Laborsaving inventions of the Industrial Revolution have saved many of us from 
the backbreaking tasks of earlier times. The electronic age has made it possible 
to exchange information and ideas rapidly around the globe. Most innovation 
(although aided by government-funded research and sometimes subsidies) has been 
introduced to the public by private enterprise. 

Yet there are serious problems, especially as the means now exist to destroy all 
humans on the planet, possibly by global climate change and certainly with 
weapons of mass destruction. Too often governments act in concert with armaments 
manufacturers to promote the sale of weapons of war, sometimes to both sides in 
a conflict. As an example, the foreign aid budget of the United States currently 
includes many times as much "military aid" as peaceful grants.

In the movement for sustainable development, groups of people have tried to 
escape from multinational corporate tyranny by  forming  self-sustaining  
communities, often drawing on the wisdom of indigenous cultures. These efforts 
for sustainable living, however, can be offset by corporate and government 
decisions, as in the case of native populations driven off their lands by mining 
and drilling operations that poisoned their water supplies and crops.

As the world becomes more interconnected, the reins of control are found in 
fewer hands and most people discover they have less control over their lives. 
History has known centralized power before, but the rise of democracy in the 
19th and 20th centuries raised the hope of greater personal freedom under 
governments answerable to their citizenry. 

Now this has often degenerated into what some call pseudo-democracy. Many people 
feel their choice in voting is between Tweedledum and Tweedledee, and so there 
are widespread protests and demonstrations, including some elements that become 
violent. Even some outbreaks of terrorism have their roots in the despair of 
people who have lost hope in peaceful solutions.

The tribal rivalries and centuries-old feuds between ancient enemies are made 
worse by irresponsible divide-and-conquer tactics of the great powers and 
marketing of armaments to both sides in each dispute, including proliferation of 
nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons of mass destruction.

When the most powerful people in the world come together in official economic 
conferences (G-8, IMF, WTO, etc.) and such unofficial groups as the Bilderberg, 
the Trilateral Commission, and the Council on Foreign Relations, they remain in 
splendid isolation from the less powerful people. After a series of protest 
demonstrations at major cities, they have recently held their official meetings 
behind strong barricades and heavily armed police forces and/or at isolated 
locations. 

The emphasis is on economic growth, but the measures they use are badly flawed. 
Gross domestic product (GDP) is based entirely on money transactions, thus 
missing the value of housework, home cooking, child raising, do-it-yourself work 
at home, "sweat equity," and all forms of voluntary service. Robert Eisner's  
1994 book, The  Misunderstood Economy, asked: "If restaurant meals are 
substituted for home cooking, is that an increase in product?" He estimated 
conservatively that if the value of unpaid labor services in the home were 
included the 1992 U.S. GDP would have been $8 trillion instead of $6 trillion. 
On the other hand, GDP ignores economic harm done to nature and to the health of 
individuals. 

Prominent at these meetings are top bankers, financiers, corporate executives, 
media owners, and politicians. Hardly ever present are labor leaders, consumer 
representatives, or environmentalists. Secrecy results in rumors of plots for 
world control that are sometimes wild and sometimes not totally outlandish. 

There are indications that the globalization moves and "neo-liberal" economics 
of these organizations have led to increasing disparity of wealth and income 
both within and between nations. In short, it is held that the rich are getting 
richer and the poor are getting poorer. Details of this disparity in wealth and 
income are given in Chapter 4. 

A June 2002 report of the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) on the 
poverty trap of less developed countries investigated "whether the current form 
of globalization is tightening the poverty trap and also increasing the 
vulnerabilities of those countries that appear to be escaping it." The answer 
was, in effect, "Yes." The report, however, stopped short of admitting that 
World Bank, IMF, etc., are collaborating with multinational corporations to 
bring about the impoverishment described in the report. (www.unctad.org)

The specific problems that are described in the chapters on political systems, 
corporate power, monetary systems, and the communications media are very closely 
interrelated-and also interwoven with concerns about education, justice, 
medicine, religious freedom, land use, the oceans, and the atmosphere.

Aids to their solution are presented in the chapters on spirituality, 
alternative life styles, and education. Proposed solutions are summarized in the 
final chapter of conclusions.


The discussion addresses how local, national, and international governments can 
be made answerable to the people they govern instead of just the power elites. 
The goal is to make globalization work for the benefit of people and the 
environment instead of "neo-liberal" globalization of the "wild west" variety 
that has spread poverty, financial crisis, desperation, and bloodshed in many 
parts of the world that have become more and more unstable.


2

Perfecting Democracy in Political Systems

(based on a summary by James Hall in Orlando, Florida)


This chapter notes the spread of democratic elections as the basis for 
governance in more countries of the world, although imperfections exist even in 
the best of democracies. The forces that concentrate wealth and power into a few 
hands, and that abuse the earth's environment for their own benefit, also oppose 
democratic reforms, social justice, human rights, and efforts to create a 
sustainable local economy. Ways of overcoming these obstacles and furthering 
genuine democracy are discussed. A "security state" of the closed, 
fundamentalist and ruthless variety is not the solution for public fears and 
needs generated by terrorism.

Although many people would like to conduct their personal, family, and community 
lives without interference from government, that is not the way it is. Even 
remote parts of the world are coming under political control, often combined 
with invasion by economic power. Thus traditional cultures in areas as 
widespread as Nigeria, Brazil, Papua New Guinea, and elsewhere are being driven 
off their land by the combined actions of governments and foreign exploiting 
industries, including cyanide or oil spills in their streams, destruction of 
their crops, and repressive police action.

There is a legitimate difference of opinion as to how much or little government 
is desirable, but the alternative to government-anarchy-has not been 
demonstrated to work well in a world where greed overpowers goodwill. That makes 
it important what kind of government we have. Anarchy requires an educated and 
empowered independent public to work properly. It is never in the best interests 
of hierarchies to allow these conditions to exist in reality. 

Although it is often far from perfect in practice, democracy operates on the 
principle that no leader can be trusted to know what people need and want better 
than the people themselves. It aims to meet the desires of the majority without 
being unfair to minorities.

Those who are lucky live in one of the world's liberal democracies where 
generally (if not perfectly) leaders are elected by popular vote and human 
rights are honored. Since 1950, the world has seen a phenomenal growth of 
democracies, from 22 nations representing 31% of the world's population, to 120 
electoral democracies representing 58% of the world's people. 

That's a shift of historic importance, but it's not enough. Seventy-two 
sovereign nations representing 42% of the world's people still have no 
representative government. In such nations, working for democracy is an 
important first step towards creating social justice and a sustainable world 
economy. Some countries may have a democratically elected government, but few 
recognized human rights, and in some democracy and human rights may rest on 
fragile foundations. 

Even members of long-established democracies can't rest but must work hard to 
keep elections honest and citizens' rights from being abused. There are powerful 
interests that benefit from restricting human rights and corrupting democratic 
institutions. 

There was a time, perhaps, when politics was a noble statecraft, and politicians 
were regarded in high esteem.  Politics was not their profession; they came from 
various respectable professional backgrounds; such as lawyers, physicians, 
teachers, landlords etc. Politicians belonging to a party believed in the 
ideology for which the party stood,   and  dedicated  themselves  in fulfilling 
the party objectives. Today politics is a full time profession to most 
politicians.

The forces that concentrate wealth and power into a few hands and that abuse the 
earth's environment for their own benefit oppose democratic reforms, social 
justice, human rights, and efforts to create a sustainable local economy. Their 
goal is to block genuine democratic institutions, manipulate elections, limit 
human rights, and use the environment for their shortsighted interest-to gain 
wealth and hold onto power.

A good citizen's political work is never done, and he or she must be vigilant 
both to create a better world and to sustain it. Corruption can occur both in 
the electoral process and in unfair influencing of public officials that amounts 
to bribery although not always illegal.

For example, The Buying of Congress by Charles Lewis and the Center for Public 
Integrity (Avon Books, 1998) reports that in the United States thousands die and 
millions become ill from poisoned foods. Meanwhile Congress has blocked tougher 
safety standards and received $40 million campaign donations in ten years from 
the food industry. 

Also, members of Congress received $180 million from the 500 largest 
corporations and cut corporate income tax rates to provide only 10% of all 
federal revenue compared with 28% in 1956. With great difficulty a bill was 
passed in 2002 that will make a start on campaign finance reform after the 
November 2002 elections.

The light of world public opinion has brought about honest elections in many 
countries for the first time with the help in some cases of United Nations 
monitors and in other cases of impartial international observers organized by 
former U.S. president Jimmy Carter.

Any nation dominated by just one party fails to function as a democratic system. 
Some regimes try to give the appearance of democracy, but if only one party is 
permitted, the elections are mere window-dressing. The same is true in a two-
party system when the same powerful interests largely control both parties. New 
parties should not face unreasonable requirements to get on the ballot. 
Legitimate voters should not be hindered and fraudulent voting should be 
prevented.

The method of recording and counting votes varies among democratic countries, 
and there are advocates for each system. Balloting methods range from paper 
ballots marked with party symbols for the illiterate to high-tech mechanical or 
electronic voting machines. Honest counts require that there be a way to recheck 
the votes, so paper ballots must be safeguarded and machine tallies must 
preserve an audit trail so that totals can be checked against individual votes.

Some elections are conducted on a "winner-take-all" basis where the candidate 
with the most votes in his or her district is elected. An alternative is 
proportional representation where each party gets the number of seats in a 
representative body that is in proportion to the votes it got in the election. 
In some jurisdictions, if a candidate fails to receive a majority of the votes 
cast, a run-off election is held between the two highest scoring candidates. 
Preference voting, or "instant run-off," is sometimes used where voters record 
first, second, and maybe third choices, for example, which are counted in order 
until someone has a majority.

The U.S. presidential election involves an indirect method in which members of 
an "Electoral College" are chosen on the basis of whom they are pledged to 
support and then they choose the president (and vice president). Most states 
allocate all their electoral votes to the party that scored highest. Usually 
this results in  choosing  a  president  who  also  received  the  highest 
national popular vote, but there have been four exceptions, including George W. 
Bush in 2000, who was was chosen by a difference of 537 votes in one state. 

Variations in these methods can be quite acceptable, so long as they are 
approved by those governed and reflect the will of the people. Choices made by 
politicians, however, often suit their own personal and party interests. One of 
their tricks is to lay out districts (constituencies) for party advantage. This 
is called "gerrymandering" for an American politician named Gerry who mapped a 
district in the shape of a salamander.

Officials, once elected, can be subverted in various ways. Corporations 
increasingly are using favors to politicians in ways that are tantamount to 
bribes, although they may not meet the legal definition of a crime. Even judges 
receive benefits that interfere with their objectivity. Corporations in the 
United States, and organizations heavily financed by them, have entertained at 
least 600 federal judges at luxury resort locations for seminars where they are 
exposed to propaganda for a pro-business movement called Law and Economics.

Corporations have also spent millions to sponsor research and endow 
professorships reinforcing their points of view in law schools and other areas 
of academic study, notably including economics. Since the creation of NAFTA and 
WTO (see Chapter 3), they have used clauses banning trade restrictions to sue 
against national and local laws designed to protect health, safety, and the 
environment. Through the World Bank and IMF (see Chapters 3 and 4) they have 
obtained control of government-owned telephone systems, water supplies, and 
other public utilities, to privatize them for private profit, as well as 
drilling and mining to the detriment of local farmers and fishermen.

National and local governments find themselves forced to compete against each 
other to attract industry by offering subsidies and repeal of public interest 
laws and regulations. One proposed method of forcing multinational corporations 
to "play by the rules" is the concept of "Simultaneous Policy" explained in a 
book of that name by John Bunzl. It suggests that political parties could be 
induced to pledge that when they are in power, and when most other nations have 
similarly pledged, the nations will simultaneously enact measures for such 
control of international finance and industry as individual nations were unable 
to do on their own. 

The International Simultaneous Policy Organisation (ISPO) is working toward that 
end in more than 20 countries (www.simpol.org). Among its objectives is the 
democratizing of such international agencies as the World Bank, IMF, WTO, etc.

The World Federalist Association (www.wfa.org) and the Campaign for UN Reform 
(www.cunr.org) work for strengthening and reforming the United Nations. Despite 
the accomplishments of the UN, it also needs to be made more democratic and 
responsible to the world's people. Any higher level of government needs to be 
carefully limited in its scope and kept under democratic control to preclude the 
creation of a global tyranny.

A further problem that complicates efforts for worldwide peace and freedom is 
the desire of some groups to establish a separate national homeland. This 
involves taking over land occupied by someone else and/or seceding from an 
existing government that usually wants to keep control. Hostilities can result 
with participants being labeled "freedom fighters" by one side and "terrorists" 
by the other. Under ideal conditions, each nation would be inhabited only by 
people who willingly consent to being under the government, which in turn would 
guarantee the rights and freedom of all. That is obviously a very long-term 
objective, but taking steps in that direction is imperative, both for the good 
of the contenders and for the welfare of the whole world in the context of 
weapons of mass destruction.

Despite general agreement on most of the points in this chapter, there are some 
people who feel that political systems are so corrupt that it is useless to 
vote. They prefer to arrange their own lives in a way they think will be 
beneficial to people and the environment and to encourage others to do likewise.

Voting percentages have declined sharply in many countries, partly because of a 
cynical feeling that "my vote won't make any difference," and partly because 
commercial media have encouraged later generations to focus on entertainment, 
trivia, and self-gratification. In a few countries, voting is legally required. 
This, it can be argued, is an invasion of freedom. If voting is to enable 
everyone to make choices, it should include the choice of not voting. Some have 
suggested a choice on the ballot should be "none of the above" with the election 
to be declared invalid if that choice wins.

While some believe that progress lies in adopting different lifestyles and 
community organizations (which can certainly be beneficial), the freedom to 
pursue these and other personal choices seems to require reform of the powerful 
structures that limit freedom. The many sacrifices of those who died to replace 
despotism with democracy, and the eagerness of newly enfranchised citizens of 
former tyrannies to exercise their voting rights despite all obstacles, are 
arguments against abandoning one's right to vote.

Global domination by corporate cartels has had detrimental effects on both the 
more powerful and less powerful countries. Arms sales have fueled internal 
warfare in less developed countries. The destruction of indigenous environments 
plus concentration of unemployed and homeless people in cities, combined    with    
repressive   governments   in   league   with  the multinational corporations 
(mining, oil, and timber companies) has generated waves of migration for 
economic and political reasons.

As developed countries have been overrun by immigrants, often seeking asylum, 
cultural clashes and competition for jobs have had their effects. For example, 
European social-democratic or center-left governments, which have been under 
pressure from private business to reduce their social services and worker 
protections, are finding that new issues are arising. The traditional supporters 
of those parties see their social protections deteriorating while immigrants 
seek to share the benefits.

Immigration and integration are now at the top of the political agenda in 
Europe, which is sad for all those who are engaged in rational discussions. 
There are real social and economic reasons for existing tensions, but culture 
becomes more or less the platform on which people can express their frustrations 
and emotions, feeling patriotic.

New opposition arises to parties that are seen to be patronizing, arrogant, 
bureaucratic, and "politically correct." Voters turn to parties that promise 
action on the new issues that concern them, such as street crime and threats by 
Islamic fundamentalism against traditional liberal values. People don't trust 
the professional politicians anymore, in London, Paris, or The Hague. In 
Holland, for example, the last 5-10 years saw the rise of countless local 
parties that won local elections with local issues, feeding on fear of street 
crime and outrage about bureaucratic decisions of the local councils. 

The localization of politics could be furthered by Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT), especially through the Internet, which makes it easier for 
localities to be more independent from the knowledge and power centers. People 
become better informed, communicate via the web, organize themselves  in  
discussion  groups,   meet each other,   and  start  to move. The possibility 
for people to work at home instead of travelling to the city can make them more 
independent and capable of participating in self-government.

SUGGESTIONS FOR ACTION: If some of these suggestions are impossible under your 
form of government, consider them as goals to be reached, and work to change the 
political circumstances so that you have the right as a citizen to exercise 
them.

1. Work to advance social justice, democracy, and environmentally sound 
policies.
2. Work against concentration of wealth and power into a few hands-whether in 
the name of good or ill-and against pollution or waste the earth's resources.
3. Block efforts of those who would subvert democracy by organizing opposition; 
educating others and demonstrating against wrongs; taking legal action to 
enforce human rights.
4. Vote at every opportunity: check out candidates' records, join a political 
party or create one to reflect your values, volunteer to help candidates write 
letters for publication attend meetings and express your concerns, donate time 
and money if you can.
5. Help keep your political system honest: work as a poll-watcher and monitor 
the counting of ballots, help those who are illiterate to read their ballots, 
support efforts to keep balloting both secret and honest.
6. Become involved in local community organizations that reflect your agenda, 
work with local people to clean up your local environment, to create more parks 
and people-friendly environments, to support public transportation, to protect 
civil rights, to elect responsible local and national officials, and to fight  
pollution  and  unwanted  corporate  intrusion; work  to educate your community 
through letters, newsletters, organized events, and demonstrations. 
7. Encourage cooperation by your local groups with other local, regional, 
national, and international organizations. Support candidates and parties that 
advance your efforts and work for positive changes.
8. Work for: 
* the creation of constitutional, democratic institutions; 
* the non-violent resolution of conflicts; 
* basic human rights for all people; 
* environmental protections that sustain local ecosystems; 
* recycling of wastes; 
* alternative energy sources; 
* environmentally appropriate building technologies; habitat and species 
restoration;
* effective monitoring of ecosystems; 
* sustainable local agriculture;
* voter initiatives that can bypass representative bodies and place issues 
directly before the voters;
* open government, including keeping all meetings and records public and 
"transparent" subject to the public's scrutiny and criticism; 
* public financing of political campaigns to keep money from "special interests" 
from having an impact on the government's ability to do the people's work;
* media (press, radio, television, web access, etc.) free of control by 
government or corporate monopolies but required to broadcast candidate debates 
and political forums in the public interest;
* democratic regulation of all private use of the "public commons," including 
air, water, public parkland, etc.
* "true-costing" of any products or industrial processes that might cause 
environmental degradation, including in their costs the regulation and clean-up 
of any pollution, and use of those costs to perform the cleanup;
* creation of agencies to monitor the environment, detect pollution and 
polluters, and to charge and fine them the amount needed to cleanup any 
resulting pollution;
* redefinition of the legal status of the corporation (see Chapter 3);
* promotion of democratic, transparent international organizations to replace 
current institutions like the World Bank, WTO, and IMF.

When considering reforms to correct global abuses, it should not be forgotten 
that votes can be registered in the marketplace and not just at the polling 
place. Some organizations have had success with boycotts of offending companies 
to bring changes in their behavior. The choices of consumers can have 
considerable effect on the degree of pollution and waste of natural resources 
resulting from production. To accomplish favorable results, they must resist 
advertising and promotion of inefficient, wasteful, and unnecessary products. 


"If liberty and equality, as is thought by some are chiefly to be found in 
democracy, they will be best attained when all persons alike share in the 
government to the utmost."
-Aristotle (384 BC-322 BC)

"It has been said that democracy is the worst form of government except all the 
others that have been tried."
-Sir  Winston Churchill (1874-1965)


3

Restoring Human Control over Corporate Power


"Corporations rule," says the Hightower Lowdown newsletter. "No other 
institution comes close to matching the power that the 500 biggest corporations 
have amassed over us. The clout of all 535 members of [the U.S.] Congress is 
nothing compared to the individual and collective power of these predatory 
behemoths that now roam the globe, working their will over all competing 
interests.

"The aloof and pampered executives who run today's autocratic and secretive 
corporate states have effectively become our sovereigns. From who gets health 
care to who pays taxes, from what's on the news to what's in our food, they have 
usurped the people's democratic authority and now make these broad social 
decisions in private, based solely on the interests of their corporations." The 
quoted paragraphs introduced an April 2002 expos‚ of the world's biggest 
corporation, Wal-Mart, with more than $220 billion annual revenues 
(www.jimhightower.com).

The compensation of chief executive officers of these corporations (CEOs) in the 
United States by 2001 averaged 531 times that of blue-collar workers compared 
with a 40 to 1 ratio in 1960. The highest rewards went to those who had fired 
workers and found tax loopholes for their companies, according to "Executive 
Excess 2001," Institute for Policy Studies and United for a Fair Economy 
(Multinational Monitor, Oct. 2001, p. 4).


Some, but not all, of the world's wealthiest people are CEOs-others exert their 
control behind the scenes as major stockholders or financial backers. Corporate 
management, directors, investment advisors, stockbrokers, bankers, lawyers, and 
accountants are supposed to be looking after the interests of the stockholders. 
Often they seem to be more concerned with personal profits to be made from 
trading in and out, fees, commissions, stock options, and all the other gimmicks 
for their own benefit. They "scratch each others backs" and "one hand washes 
another." Ordinary investors are lucky to have their interests get any 
consideration. Their ownership through mutual funds and/or pension plans is 
routinely used by the trustees (without consulting them) to rubber-stamp 
management proposals.

Extreme abuses in some corporations came to light in 2002, when one of the 
world's biggest accounting firms, Arthur Andersen, was convicted of obstruction 
of justice in the case of Enron. This involved one of the world's largest 
corporations where members of top management walked away with millions of 
dollars from the company plus large profits from selling Enron stock before 
declaring bankruptcy. 

The Andersen firm provided advice to set up undisclosed partnerships for hiding 
corporate losses, and simultaneously served as auditors to verify the 
reliability of the company's financial reports. Employee pension funds invested 
in Enron stock were almost completely wiped out, as was the value of stock 
bought by small investors trusting financial analysts and stock brokers.

Although Enron had been rated at or near the top of all corporations based on 
the market value of its stock, it owned very few physical assets. It was 
described as an energy trader, and its manipulations were discovered to have 
been behind the electric power crisis in California. Other activities included 
buying public utilities, including water supply services, from governments 
around the world at bargain prices and then jacking up the rates to customers of 
the privatized monopoly. It was among the largest donors of campaign 
contributions to politicians-tantamount to bribes, if not legally so defined. 

While investigations and litigation involving Enron were still going on, another 
Arthur Anderson client, WorldCom, disclosed the largest corporate overstatement 
of cash flow in history, amounting to more than $3.8 billion in the previous 15 
months, using a series of accounting tricks to hide expenses and inflate cash 
flow. The company's CEO owed the company more than $366 million for loans and 
loan guarantees when he abruptly resigned, the stock that had sold for $62 
dropped to about 9 cents, and 17,000 workers are to lose their jobs. 

Only a week earlier, executives of Rite Aid, a drug store chain, were indicted, 
having run up a record overstatement of profits totaling $2.3 billion over two 
years. This company's auditor was another large accounting firm, KPMG. Other 
current corporate scandals include Global Crossing (an Andersen client) and 
Tyco. Merrill Lynch and other brokerage firms were found to have been urging 
customers to buy stock in such companies that the analysts knew were in trouble.

Multinational corporations have close ties to major financial houses, which will 
be discussed further in the next chapter. Directors of banks, investment 
companies, and other corporations serve on each other's boards and they or their 
representatives are appointed official advisors to governments. They employ 
former government officials as lobbyists, who then may return to prominent 
government positions in a process sometimes known as the "revolving door." 
Armament companies put retired generals and admirals on their boards of 
directors, while top executives move in an out of high-level government jobs.

Those munitions manufacturers, preferring to be called "defense industries," 
also are major financial supporters of politicians, resulting in getting not 
only government contracts but also subsidies and help in selling their products 
to foreign countries.  A report by the Congressional Research Service in 2000 
disclosed that the United States is the world's leading arms merchant, 
responsible for almost half the weapons sold worldwide, 70% going to developing 
countries. Listed next in order as suppliers were Russia, France, Germany, 
Britain, China, and Italy.

Aside from threats of nuclear war and terrorist attacks, the major challenge to 
democracy and human progress involves the domination by corporations of the 
institutions of self-government, which is made more difficult when the 
corporations are actually bigger than the national governments. Democracy has 
always had an uphill fight against various forms of tyranny, whether absolute 
monarchies or military dictatorships.

Through concentrated corporate control of the information media, as well as 
corporate favors and campaign financing to politicians, the rulers of big 
corporations tend to get their way most of the time. On the world scene, global 
corporations (including global bankers and financial companies) dominate 
international agencies unrestrained by democratic safeguards.

A network of faceless bureaucracies, the most familiar of which are the World 
Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the World Trade Organization 
(WTO), make no pretense of being democratic and are dominated by representatives 
from large transnational corporations and banks. 

Already, both the USA and the European Union (EU) have been compelled by the WTO 
to annul various of their health and environmental laws. Most of the third world 
has been forced to adopt entire legislative agendas dictated by the IMF under 
what are called "free trade" treaties, and under conditions which are attached 
to loans given to third-world countries by the regime's agencies. 

The governments, in some cases, have made deals with multinational corporations 
to share in profits from mining operations that drive native populations off 
their lands either by using military force or by contaminating their sources of 
livelihood, resulting in cities crowded with unemployed, homeless adults and 
children. 

Under pressure from the global bankers to attract foreign investors, governments 
have suppressed labor unions and held down wages, benefits, and labor standards. 
They have given special tax breaks to foreign corporations and relaxed 
environmental regulation. Recently  they  have  been  required  to raise water 
prices and then sell government water utilities to private monopolies 
("Privatization Tidal Wave: IMF/World Bank Water Policies and the Price Paid by 
the Poor" by Sara Grusky, Multinational Monitor, Sept. 2001).

Nations have also allowed misuse of patent laws. Corporations send 
representatives, sometimes called "bio-pirates," to learn from indigenous people 
about natural remedies. Then the companies apply for patents to turn these 
remedies into profitable monopolies. Patents have even been awarded for genes 
and other natural phenomena that corporations have identified or "discovered" in 
their laboratories.

A study of World Bank and IMF loan documents with 26 countries shows that they 
require privatizing of government-owned enterprises, layoffs of government 
employees, easing of rules on firings and working conditions, increasing the 
wage gap between employees and managers, and cutting pensions for workers. 

For example, the World Bank recommended to Vicente Fox when his new government 
came into power in Mexico that there be a phase-out of severance payments, 
collective bargaining, enforceable labor contracts, seniority rules, and 
liability for subcontractors' employees. It also has stated that it cannot 
support workers' freedom of association and right to collective bargaining. 
("Against the Workers: How IMF and World Bank Policies Undermine Labor Power and 
Rights" by Vincent Lloyd and Robert Weissman, Multinational Monitor, Sept. 
2001.) 

A few examples from around the world will illustrate the unfortunate results. In 
Haiti, after the military dictatorship was removed from power and the elected 
president Aristide returned with U.S. help, the IMF, the World Bank, the U.S. 
Agency for International Development, and the Inter-American Development Bank 
offered to help Haiti rebuild. However, the economic program they imposed was 
the so-called "neo-liberal" structural adjustment that bankers have favored 
around the world. 


Similar plans forced on Haiti's neighbors-Mexico, Nicaragua, and Venezuela-were 
supposed to reduce poverty and external debts. Instead they widened the income 
gap, increased poverty, and undermined national sovereignty. These conditions 
involved privatization of state-owned industries, deregulation of the economy, 
and opening the country to massive foreign investment.

Costa Rica has long been known as one of the most democratic of Latin American 
countries, with less of an income gap than its neighbors. The IMF and the World 
Bank have begun to change this, ostensibly to pay off foreign debt. Thousands of 
small farmers have been displaced in favor of large agricultural export 
operations. Increasing crime and violence have resulted in higher police costs, 
and the country now imports its basic food requirements. Although foreign debt 
has doubled, Costa Rica has been able to meet its debt service payments, so the 
IMF and the World Bank call it a success story.

The World Bank, which awarded Mexico 13 structural and sectoral adjustment loans 
between 1980 and 1991, imposed the following conditions on its 1991 agricultural 
loan: slashing tariffs, canceling  price  controls  on  basic  foods,  
privatizing state-owned monopolies, and eliminating price guarantees for corn-
the mainstay of the rural poor.

A million people died in Mozambique, a Cold War hot spot where rebel forces 
backed by apartheid South Africa and right-wing U.S. business with covert U.S. 
government approval fought the left-wing movement that took over the government 
after Portugal pulled out. The U.S. forced Mozambique to join the IMF and World 
Bank in 1984, which resulted in World Bank-mandated "structural adjustment" in 
1987, and an IMF-controlled stabilization" in 1990.

The World Bank used many loans in the 1950s in an effort to win India away from 
policies of building local production to displace imports and of government 
intervention in the economy. Large-scale development projects have displaced 20 
million people over a 40-year period. After the World Bank withheld $750 million 
in Indian energy loans to enforce compliance with its opposition to the 
government program for electrification in rural areas, the Indian government 
scaled back alternative energy subsidies and power projects in its poorest 
states. 

The fastest growing component of the World Bank is now the International Finance 
Corporation (IFC) which loans directly to private companies, including 
multinational corporations, such as Chase, Citibank, Sumitomo Bank, New York 
Life, DuPont, Daimler-Chrysler, Electricite de France, Portugal Telecom, Shell, 
etc. Simultaneously, governments are pressured to turn over public utilities to 
such private companies. ("Dubious Development: The World Bank's Foray Into 
Private Sector Investment" by Charlie Cray, Multinational Monitor, September 
2001; www.essential.org/monitor)

When the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was negotiated, certain 
externalities were supposed to be covered by "side agreements" on workers rights 
and the environment, but subsequent events showed the agreements to be 
toothless. The greatest harm was in the failure of protections against pollution 
and labor exploitation. As reported in a 1996 article in Dollars and Sense, 
"Corporations and their government allies in all three NAFTA countries 
vehemently opposed setting up institutions with strong monitoring and 
enforcement powers." They had their way, as no budget was provided for 
enforcement. A proposed expansion of NAFTA to the whole Western Hemisphere as 
Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) seems likely to offer the same empty 
promises.

The European Community or European Union (EU), on the other hand consists of 
nations that are much more concerned about preventing the exploitation of labor 
and the environment than the NAFTA countries have been. National laws and EU 
rules, such as the Social Chapter, provide a framework within which corporations 
must operate, however grudgingly. The biggest corporations and political parties 
friendly to them keep trying to relax such rules.

One of the first attempts to bring corporations under control occurred in Europe 
on May 30, 2002, according to a news release issued by Richard Howitt, European 
Parliament Rapporteur (Spokesperson) on Corporate Social Responsibility. The 
European Parliament in Brussels voted for new legislation to require companies 
to publicly report annually on their social and environmental performance, to 
make board members personally responsible for these practices, and to establish 
legal jurisdiction against European companies' abuses in developing countries.

In Europe social-democratic parties have been trying a "Third Way" between 
corporate freedom and social responsibility. They set out to reform the welfare 
state, sometimes (as in The Netherlands, Belgium, and France)  together with 
moderate Liberal politicians (that is, in European terminology, those favoring 
corporate freedom).

This led to great disenchantment among the population, who saw private wealth 
grow while public wealth and security dwindled. European people want to be 
protected against overwhelming economic power by a social-democratic state, but 
the politicians weakened government in favor of the market.

Paradoxically, the extreme right-wing politicians in Europe, who want a strong 
state to close the borders against immigrants and proclaim jingoistic values, 
now tend to be the only parties giving people some sense of active government. 
Corporate power over the people--without responsible social government--leads 
not only to despair and terrorism in the Third World, but also to a boost for 
political fascism in Europe.

People feel helpless against the economy and seek for scapegoats for their 
disenchantment, rising crime, and economic volatility. There is a grave danger 
now of a link between private corporate power and the emerging extreme-right 
parties. These parties blame the usual scapegoats, such as immigrants and Jews 
for social problems actually due to global oligarchy and thus shift attention 
away from the real causes.

Franklin D. Roosevelt said: "The liberty of a democracy is not safe if the 
people tolerate the growth of private power to a point where it becomes stronger 
than their democratic State itself. That, in its essence, is Fascism - ownership 
of government by an individual, by a group or any controlling private power."

Instead of listening to the people, European Social Democrats, like 
corporations, have relied on marketing techniques to sell their policies. They 
are now paying the price for leaving Europe open to uncontrolled corporate power 
and unreformed globalization. It is in the interest of believers in democracy 
all over the world to strengthen rational, democratic structures, expanding them 
into the corporate world, and thus to give people their power back.

Apart from corporate domination of many aspects of government, the structure of 
the work environment imposed by large corporations has serious effects on family 
and community life. The past few decades have seen changes that reduce the time 
people have for activities outside the workplace environment, although taking 
different form in three areas: the United States, Europe, and less developed 
areas. 

The expansion of work by women outside the home has been widespread. To the 
extent it represents more options open to women this can be counted as progress. 
However, for many women the option of remaining at home to care for children has 
largely been foreclosed by economic necessity.

Longer working hours have been required by employers where unions and government 
protections are weak, particularly in the sweatshops of less developed 
countries, where people have been forced off their land to form a labor pool in 
the cities and where child labor is common. Employers in the United States 
extend the hours in some jobs to avoid hiring additional workers, which would 
entail the cost of fringe benefits such as health insurance, pension plans, 
unemployment insurance, etc. Conversely, employers make some other jobs part 
time-often about 37 hours per week-to avoid coverage for fringe benefits, but 
workers have to take more than one job to survive. Europe has been less 
affected, so far, by the trend for long hours, due to relatively stronger labor 
unions.

In most countries, including the U.S., corporations and their controlling 
stockholders tend to dominate politics despite any laws intended to prevent it. 
Corporations generally enjoy a favored status   in  the  courts  where  they  
have  the  privileges  of  natural persons without the responsibilities. The 
limited liability of corporations allows their officers to escape financial and 
personal responsibility in many improper schemes such as the Enron scandal 
(where the final outcome for officers of the corporation and its auditors is yet 
to be seen). It is common for top officials to get reimbursement from the 
company for legal expense and fines whenever they are taken to court for their 
actions.

"In 1971, only 175 businesses had registered lobbyists in Washington. By 1988, 
1,634 out of every 100,000 Washingtonians was a lawyer," according to The 
Paradox of American Democracy, Elites, Special Interests, and the Betrayal of 
Public Trust by John B. Judis. "By the mid-1980," writes Judis, "there were over 
a thousand former officials in Washington working as lobbyists, including over 
200 former members of Congress...and much of what they were hired to do was to 
defeat environmental and social legislation which the corporations deem 
'unaffordable'."

As governments began to abandon enforcement of antitrust laws, mergers and 
acquisitions placed more and more of the world's economy in fewer hands. 
Economies of scale are usually given as the reason for business combinations.  
For any business, efficiency tends to increase with size up to some point.  
Often this is interpreted as "the bigger the better." However, large units are 
not always more efficient, because the disadvantages of bureaucracy exist in 
private enterprise as well as government.

Many studies have shown that relatively small companies produce more innovation, 
new products, and new jobs than the giant corporations.  The motivation for 
mergers and acquisitions, therefore, is more often a desire for market control 
than efficiency. Another motive, of course, has been the opportunity for 
windfalls to top management as well as Wall Street lawyers and investment 
bankers.

Adam Smith's "Wealth of Nations" that explained how an "invisible hand" will 
cause the selfish actions of suppliers and consumers to create an equilibrium in 
the market that benefits everyone better than the mercantilist system (with its 
government monopolies) then existing. The book is revered by classical 
economists, but they often forget that his theory completely depends on really 
free competition and other basic assumptions about the market. Smith was aware 
of imperfections and declared in that book: "It is to prevent reduction of 
price...by restraining free competition...that all corporations, and the greater 
part of corporation laws, have been established." 

The assumptions of classical economics on the Adam Smith model are seriously 
violated by Wal-Mart, which has become the world's largest corporation, 
surpassing ExxonMobil. In the Hightower Lowdown article cited at the beginning 
of this chapter, Wal-Mart is not only a scofflaw in its own labor practices but 
also presses its suppliers in China and other low-wage countries (whose names 
and locations it keeps secret) to drive down costs by cutting wages and 
benefits. The article continues:

"By slashing its retail prices way below cost when it enters a community, Wal-
Mart can crush our groceries, pharmacies, hardware stores, and other retailers, 
then raise its prices once it has monopoly control over the market....By 
crushing local businesses, this giant eliminates three decent jobs for every two 
Wal-Mart jobs that it creates...."

Special characteristics of corporations under U.S. law that make them different 
from individuals include these:

 1. Corporations have perpetual life. 
 2. Corporations can be in two or more places at the same time. 
 3. Corporations cannot be jailed. 
 4. Corporations pursue a single-minded goal, profit, and are typically legally 
prohibited from seeking other ends. 
 5. There are no limits, natural or otherwise, to corporations' potential size. 
 6. Because of their political power, they are able to define or, at very least, 
substantially affect the civil and criminal regulations that define the 
boundaries of permissible behavior. Virtually no individual criminal has such 
abilities. 
 7. Corporations can combine with each other, into bigger and more powerful 
entities. 
 8. Corporations can divide themselves, shedding subsidiaries or affiliates that 
are controversial, have brought them negative publicity, or pose liability 
threats. 


These unique attributes give corporations extraordinary power, and makes the 
challenge of checking their power all the more difficult. The institutions are 
much more powerful than individuals, which makes all the more frightening their 
single-minded profit maximizing efforts. 
(Adapted from "Corporations: Different Than You and Me" by Russell Mokhiber and 
Robert Weissman) 

The power of the corporate oligarchy is displayed whenever there is an 
international meeting of such groups as the World Bank, International Monetary 
Fund (IMF), World Trade Organization (WTO), or the G-8 economic summit. The 
United States sends its CIA and FBI to work with local agencies to make sure the 
delegates are not bothered by, or exposed to, any public objections.

Peaceful protesters are regularly attacked with tear gas, water cannons, and 
charging hordes of police with helmets, shields, clubs, and  firearms, using the 
excuse that somewhere vandals are rioting and looting-or else citing violence, 
when the violence was actually by the police or their agents provocateurs. 
Meanwhile, inside the fortified enclave the big corporations get what they want 
while defenders of the environment and human rights get mere lip service.

Despite the enormous power of the corporations and their friends in government, 
the role of corporations in the political process tends to be ignored by the 
academic community. According to Russell Mokhiber, editor of the Corporate Crime 
Reporter and Robert Weissman, editor of the Multinational Monitor, a recent 
convention of the American Political Science Association in Washington, D.C., 
almost entirely neglected corporate power in about a thousand papers presented. 

Local, regional, and national governments compete for industrial development by 
offering subsidies, privileges, and tax breaks at the expense of the public and 
other businesses. By failing to enforce health and safety standards, they put 
the public at risk of disease, injury, and death, while allowing business to 
profit from polluting air, water, and food, including the use of people as 
unwilling guinea pigs for experiments with hormones, radiation, and genetic 
modification of food.

Politicians accept money from business interests to let them drive people off 
their land and poison it with petroleum spills, cyanide from gold mining, and 
other abuses. Corrupt national leaders hide their ill-gotten gains in secret 
foreign bank accounts, while using force to intimidate and kill opponents of 
exploitation by the multinational corporations. They side with business owners 
to destroy trade unions and prevent worker protests against unsafe working 
conditions.

Localities now compete for corporate headquarters and other enterprises by 
outright subsidies, tax abatements, and laws that   favor   employers    against   
trade  unions   and   unorganized workers. Similar practices are applied to 
competition for professional sports teams and even for the Olympic Games. In the 
same way, shipping companies have avoided national restrictions by chartering 
their vessels in countries like Panama and Liberia that have competed by 
offering permissive charters. 

At the global level, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) acts to protect banks 
and speculators from losses due to bad judgment, while pressuring governments to 
curtail public services. The World Bank and the IMF place conditions on 
financial aid to developing countries that favor penetration by multinational 
corporations and curtailment of government protections for its citizens.

The World Trade Organization (WTO) makes decisions in secret, with almost never 
any involvement of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Industry 
representatives and government trade negotiators often closely allied with them 
denounce health, safety, and ethical rules of member states as unauthorized 
barriers to trade and impose penalties against countries that try to enforce 
these protections. 

Information media (to be discussed in detail in another chapter) have largely 
been transformed into propaganda machines run either by repressive governments 
or by an oligarchy of corporations that control most of the media, as well as 
much of the world economy. The military-industrial complex manufactures weapons 
of mass destruction in ever larger numbers the making of which uses natural 
resources far surpassing those of the conventional market and increasingly 
places the world at risk of destruction. 

In recent years corporations have been obtaining patents that would have been 
flatly rejected in the past. Outrageous copyright extensions will be discussed 
in the chapter on the media. Corporations have now  been  allowed  to patent  
many innovations pioneered by government-conducted and/or government-financed 
research. Their friends in the U.S. Congress and Patent Office have allowed them 
to obtain patents on the products of nature (herbal remedies of indigenous 
peoples), genes of living creatures, and other things that are completely 
inappropriate to be patented. It also works out that individual inventors seldom 
get the financial benefit of their work, because their employers require them to 
sign over all their rights to the company.   

Individual actions have little direct impact on government decision-making 
today. The deck is stacked against us and manipulated by corporate interests. 
The same holds true on environmental issues where the actions of individuals 
compared with those of corporations is miniscule, but the public is subjected to 
strict emissions testing while businesses continue polluting with use of 
political influence and delaying tactics.

Some governments have set up programs to pay corporations to become more energy 
and resource efficient, but sometimes this merely resulted in corporate welfare. 
Some large corporations have invested in efficiency measures and their return on 
investment was better than their investments in their product lines.

Among the reasons for corporation actions harmful to the environment is the 
economic system that ignores what economists call "externalities." That is, 
business activities may involve serious costs to others in the form of 
pollution-caused illnesses, poisoning of food sources (such as fish in the 
streams and crops in the land), and hazards to employees that do not enter into 
product costs and prices. 

One suggested method of correcting this would be for government to require such 
costs to be included in prices, with proceeds to be used for overcoming the  
harmful effects. This is called "true-cost-pricing" and is further discussed in 
chapter 3 of Jim Bell's book, free at www.jimbell.com.

Some of the uncontrolled actions of major corporations are so heinous no 
monetary amount could compensate for the damage. At the top of the list might be 
sales of arms, often to both sides of conflicts. Here it is valuable for the 
armament manufacturers to have friends in government, both to obtain "defense" 
contracts and to arrange military aid to other countries that become customers 
of the arms producers. 

One technique widely practiced, at least in the United States, is to cultivate 
the support of admirals and generals with the prospect of lucrative positions 
and directorships upon their retirement from active duty. It also helps the 
corporations if they can obtain appointments of their people to high level 
civilian positions in the nation's defense establishment. President Dwight D. 
Eisenhower expressed concern about what he called the "military-industrial 
complex" in his farewell address.

Other seriously harmful "external" costs imposed by various large corporations 
on people around the world include air and water pollution, contamination of 
food with persistent pesticides, fostering of drug-resistant bacteria by overuse 
of antibiotics on healthy livestock, recklessly injecting hormones into dairy 
cows, and experimenting on the public by promoting genetically modified foods 
before determining that they are safe. Other related issues involve laxity in 
food handling and inspection, undisclosed irradiation of food, and use of "low-
level" radioactive materials in products sold to and/or used by the public. 

Air pollution has made the natural problems of allergies much worse. Dr. Linda 
Ford, past president of the American Lung Association and current president of 
the Asthma and Allergy Center in Nebraska, says: "Air pollution definitely makes 
people with allergies more sensitive.   Even  in  nonallergic people,  diesel 
exhaust and ground-level ozone causes inflammation of air passages." (Quoted in 
"How Global Warming Affects Your Allergies" by Heidi Ridgley in the April/May 
2002 issue of National Wildlife-see www.nwf.org/climate.) 

These widespread effects would explain why some 35 million people in the United 
States now suffer from seasonal allergies (according to the American Academy of 
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology) as compared to the experience of Dr. John 
Bostick who first identified hay fever in 1819 after spending nine years just to 
find 28 cases, according to Dr. Ford, quoted in the same article.

Another even more serious disease that undoubtedly has been greatly aggravated 
by pollution is cancer. Statistical proof is difficult, if not impossible, 
because only a few generations ago the means for identifying cancer were lacking 
and most deaths were attributed vaguely to "old age" or "natural causes." There 
have been instances, however, where cause and effect are quite clear, such as 
Love Canal. Other areas in the vicinity of polluting industries have been found 
to have much higher rates of cancer (and other diseases) than the average for 
the population.

Corporations responsible for such lethal "externalities" attempt to escape 
responsibility by at least two strategies: (1) they demand absolute proof that 
the harmful effects are due to their operation rather than other sources, and 
(2) they counter proposed regulation by trumpeting exaggerated estimates of the 
cost and asserting that it would be passed on to consumers.

They and their allies use financial and political power to thwart government 
clean-up efforts and to influence academic research. They have succeeded in 
getting cancer-fighting organizations to limit their work to assisting victims 
and recommending healthy diets instead of investigating industrial causes of 
cancer.

Under corporate pressure, governments tend to put the burden on the general 
public rather than big business (Example: passenger automobiles in the US are 
required to meet strict emissions tests, while trucks, busses, and industry-
favored sports utility vehicles (SUVs) are largely exempt-and factory 
smokestacks get delay after delay in pollution reduction.) 

In many ways, capitalist enterprises use resources efficiently, to give them 
their due, and create wealth that can be used for education and for control and 
mitigation of pollution. Perhaps it was because they had no great wealth that 
industrial Communist societies permitted so much of their pollution to go 
untreated, and lack of wealth today means that developing countries need 
assistance to reduce pollution.

Some people say that if we put the necessary democratic and environmental 
constraints on market economics, then we will have abolished capitalism. Others 
favor a reformed capitalism that sustains democratic values rather than 
restrains them and a capitalism that includes all the costs to the environment-
rather than an abolished capitalism. Such reform would include giving workers a 
legitimate right to bargain with corporations, breaking up powerful trusts, 
holding corporate officers criminally responsible for corporate crimes, and 
making it illegal for corporations to participate in any political process.

Perhaps capitalism is the only socio-economic system in world history that can 
function well in democracies. It causes democracy, because it brings into being 
a considerable middle class. This is a thesis in the book of Robert Heilbronner, 
Twenty-first Century Capitalism (1992).

The relationship between democracy and capitalism (market system) is a complex 
one. Big corporations misuse their powers, but small and middle sized companies 
(and enterpreneurs) give opportunities to individuals.

In the U.S. (and some other countries that have followed its example) there was 
what academics in political science and economics called a "mixed system" in 
which private businesses, producer cooperatives, consumer cooperatives, and 
government agencies all played their part. Then the "Chicago School" disciples 
of Milton Friedman largely prevailed in the US (and in Margaret Thatcher's 
Britain) with a new political and economic faith so opposed to any government 
activity or regulation that it could properly be described as "anarchy."

Many of us feel that small businesses competing by Adam Smith rules are fine, 
and if they so please their customers that they grow large, so be it. What is 
wrong is when businesses combine to stifle competition and improperly influence 
government. Corporations are NOT persons, and much harm was done by the US 
Supreme Court in a series of decisions that gave them even more rights than 
individuals. Limited liability without responsibility has caused much of the 
trouble we see today.

By 2000, according to a study by the Institute for Policy Studies, "The Top 200 
corporations' combined sales were bigger than the combined economies of all 
countries minus the biggest 10....Between 1983 and 1999, the profits of the Top 
200 firms grew 362.4 percent, while the number of people they employ grew by 
only 14.4 percent....U.S. corporations dominate the Top 200, with 82 slots (41 
percent of the total). Japanese firms are second, with only 41 slots." (view in 
PDF at http://www.ips-dc.org/top200.htm )

The following proposals were submitted to the forum members as a summary of 
those on which all were thought to agree:

1. Corporations, especially the multinationals (also called transnationals), 
must be brought under control. They have extended their size and power to the 
point that they are a threat to the planet and its inhabitants. Some 
corporations are actually bigger than many national governments in the world. 
They are able to get free of environmental regulation by threatening governments 
that they will move to a more permissive jurisdiction. They undermine and 
destroy labor unions by similar threats or actual movement of factories to areas 
of low or non-existent standards for wages, health, and safety.
2. Remove the legal fiction that a corporation is a person. Given that there are 
important differences between corporations and real people, corporations should 
not be awarded the rights of free speech and political activity that properly 
belong to citizens. 
3. Improper influence on government officials must be prevented. Outright 
bribery is used in some countries. Elsewhere, large corporations and their 
wealthy controlling stockholders influence public officials by campaign 
contributions and by favors such as expense-paid trips to luxury resorts, 
interest-free loans, and free use of corporate jet planes. They also underwrite 
propaganda campaigns to help political parties and candidates. To circumvent 
election laws in the US they stop short of saying "vote for X" or "vote against 
Y" but come as close to that as possible. Although it is illegal for 
corporations to contribute to political campaigns, they seem to have done so by 
various loopholes and subterfuges.
4. Newspapers and broadcasters need to be freed from the control of corporate 
cartels. Since the Telecommunications Act of 1996 there has been a parade of 
media mergers and over 4,000 radio  stations  have  been  bought  up  in the  
United States,   while television networks  are now in the hands of huge 
corporations like General Electric, Viacom, Disney, and Rupert Murdoch's News 
Corporation. Murdoch also controls large portions of the television and 
newspaper media in Great Britain, Australia, and elsewhere. Corporate media have 
done their best to hide corporate scandals and to downplay or distort any 
protests against corporations.
5. Corporate efforts to undermine pure food laws, to raise livestock under 
factory conditions with dangerous use of antibiotics and hormones, to treat food 
with hazardous radiation, to modify crops genetically without adequate testing, 
to patent life forms and traditional remedies, and to promote "killer" seeds 
that make farmers forever dependent on corporate suppliers, must be brought 
under control. This should be done by national laws to the extent possible and 
by new international controls under the UN or similar body.
6. Agencies of the United Nations need to be prevented from operating in secrecy 
in behalf of multinational corporations. On the world scene, global corporations 
(including global bankers and financial companies) dominate international 
agencies unrestrained by democratic safeguards. At the World Bank, IMF, and WTO 
the walls of secrecy should be removed, independent outside experts should be 
used, and the policy-makers and advisory groups should include balanced 
representation of the interests involved, not dominated by the global 
corporations. The World Bank should include experts not beholden to the 
financial community; e.g., economists from labor organizations, consumer groups, 
and the academic world, as well as environmental organizations and experts from 
the countries involved in their development programs, and the same should apply 
to the IMF. The WTO should include balanced representation of consumers as well 
as producers, and judges on its tribunals should be independent scientific  
experts  who  can  distinguish  legitimate  environmental concerns from mere 
pretexts, especially in the matter of food safety.
7. Voting in the World Bank and IMF needs to be more democratic, instead of 
being based on financial investment that favors rich nations, especially the 
United States. Reform of the IMF must include keeping it out of politics. The 
enormous leverage of the IMF over democratic institutions in borrowing countries 
was made plain in South Korea's presidential elections, as the Fund insisted 
that all presidential candidates endorse the IMF bailout agreement. 
8. Every available influence should be brought to bear by the UN, World Bank, 
IMF, etc., to prevent multinational corporations (in league with repressive 
governments) from driving local inhabitants off their land by pollution from 
poisons such as cyanide used in mining, by oil spills into water supplies, and 
by using violence against those who protest. There have been many instances, 
including Shell in Nigeria, BHP (Australia's largest company) in Papua New 
Guinea, Gemala Industries of Indonesia in occupied East Timor, DuPont in Goa, 
mining companies in the Philippines, and many others. 
9. Regional trade agreements such as NAFTA and global agreements such as GATT 
should not be ratified without enforceable protections of the environment and 
workers rights. Prime examples of this need are the corporations that set up 
polluting factories in Mexico near the US border and get away with firing any 
employee who joins a union. Often police and armed forces of the host nation are 
used to coerce employees.
10. Steps should be taken by national and international authorities to stop the 
bidding war in which corporations extract subsidies, tax abatements, and 
exemption from environmental and human rights requirements in a competition 
among localities for the placement of corporate activities.
11. The "revolving door" for individuals who shuttle back and forth between 
government positions and corporate lobbying needs to be abolished. In the US 
former government administrators and congressmen become lobbyists and many make 
as much as a million dollars annually. Some, like Henry Kissinger, form 
consulting firms that lobby without disclosing the names of corporations for 
whom they work.
12. Corporations should be prohibited from financing front organizations such 
as"think tanks" and purported grassroots organizations to advocate corporate 
interests, or at least their role should be publicly revealed.
13. Corporations should not be allowed to sponsor US presidential debates as 
Anheuser-Busch, U.S. Airways and 3Com did in 2000. After the original organizer, 
the League of Women Voters opened the debates to a third party candidate in 
1980, the two major parties set up a Commission on Presidential Debates (run out 
of a political consulting firm's office in Washington, D.C.) that has set rules 
effectively excluding third party candidates.
14. People should be provided information on how to organize to deal with local 
issues--how to deal with Wal-Mart moving into a small town, or a corporate 
polluter nearby, cleaning up a polluted neighborhood, or how to oppose large 
developments that destroy a community's lifestyle. (Al Norman of "Sprawl-
Busters" who has helped 88 smaller firms fight Wal-Mart, is one source.) 
15. People who wish to do so should be encouraged to develop and put into 
practice local economies, beginning with local food economies, to shorten the 
distance between producers and consumers, to make the connections between the 
two more direct, and to make this local economic activity a benefit to the local 
community.

Other proposals supported by many or most forum members:

16. There should be a democratically chosen body on a global level to act as an 
umpire to enforce rules of the economic game.
17. Restore the "mixed system" in which private businesses, producer 
cooperatives, consumer cooperatives, and government agencies all played their 
part. This has largely been destroyed in the US and other countries where it 
used to flourish. Preserve it wherever it survives.
18. Corporations should be prohibited from donating to political parties or 
campaigns.
19. Political campaigns should be publicly financed to replace bribery by means 
of campaign finance.
20. Lobbying should be strictly limited by forbidding anything of value being 
offered to public officials.
21. Make corporate officers personally responsible for violating laws.
22. Make corporations report to the public, as well as shareholders, on their 
undertakings and plans that affect workers, consumers, and the environment.
23. In regard to the terms and length of copyrights on "intellectual property" 
the right balance needs to be achieved to provide inducement for creative work 
without locking it out of the public domain for an unreasonably long period. The 
same applies to patented inventions. In the US entertainment companies like 
Disney were successful in lobbying to extend the duration of copyright far 
beyond the lifetimes of the creators.
24. There should be a body such as the "Environmental Council" proposed by Earth 
Action to make binding decisions to protect the planet, perhaps by transforming 
an already existing UN institution, with its actions subject to approval by the 
General Assembly, combined with an expanded environmental role for the World 
Court.
25. All nations need to agree to implement simultaneously a range of measures  
to re-regulate global markets and corporations in order to restore genuine 
democracy, environmental protection, and peace around the world. This is because 
no nation nor group of nations alone can control global capital nor implement 
vital economic, social or environmental policies that might incur market or 
corporate displeasure. A method for breaking this impasse is proposed by the 
International Simultaneous Policy Organization (ISPO), whose website is 
www.simpol.org.
26. If there is no other way to overcome the favored status US courts have given 
to corporations, it would have to be accomplished by constitutional amendment, 
making the limitations and responsibilities of corporations so clear the courts 
could not interpret them away.
27. Corporations should be required to have national charters rather than 
seeking charters in more permissive internal or external jurisdictions.
28. Foreign corporations should be subject to the same taxes and laws as 
domestic corporations.
29. Since the historical basis of all corporate charters is service beneficial 
to the general public, any corporate activity not beneficial to the public, 
especially if it involves explicitly illegal actions, should be cause for 
charter revocation both in the case of the parent corporation and of its foreign 
subsidiaries.
30. National laws protecting the environment, public health, safety, and human 
rights within any country should also apply to its corporations and their 
subsidiaries when operating outside that country.
31. Public officials should be prevented from holding secret meetings with heads 
of corporations and financial institutions, as at the Council on Foreign 
Relations, the Bilderberg, and the Trilateral Commission.
32. Businesses should be encouraged to use energy and resources efficiently 
without paying subsidies. In  the  efficient energy use chapter of Jim Bell's 
book he cites numerous large corporation who have invested in energy and 
resource use efficiency measures "and in every case their return on investment 
was better than their investments in their product lines."
33. As proposed by Jim Bell, governments should use experts from economics and 
accounting to determine the true cost of various goods, and then pass laws to 
include externalities, such as environmental damage, normally neglected in 
retail prices. Possible questions: Does this method create a huge bureaucracy of 
accountants to figure the true costs and lawyers to dispute them? Who gets the 
price increase? Does it become excess profit for the corporations? Does the 
government tax it away and use the proceeds to offset pollution and hazardous 
waste? If so, how do we prevent it being frittered away in litigation as is 
being done regarding the SuperFund taxes that were supposed to clean up toxic 
waste? What about the effect of these higher prices on GDP? National production 
is conventionally measured by market prices, so wouldn't the damage to 
environment and humans now be counted as an increase in GDP?
34. The obverse of true cost pricing is "The Neuman Proposal," which would have 
the government pay individuals to reduce their travel by car or plane in order 
to decrease emission of greenhouse gasses that contribute to global climate 
change. This raises questions of the possibility of enactment, the accuracy and 
administrative cost of determining these subsidies, and the possibility of fraud 
or misuse.
35. Limit the size that corporations can attain or their ability to merge to 
reduce competition. Of the world's 100 largest economic entities, 51 are now 
corporations and 49 are countries according to the Institute for Policy Studies. 
The world's top 200 corporations account for over a quarter of economic activity 
on the globe while employing less than one percent of its workforce. 
http://www.ips-dc.org/top200.htm 
36. Remove the "limited liability" of corporations (Inc., LLC, Ltd., SA, NV, 
GmbH), making the liability of corporations real and full, so it will have an 
impact on the shareholders and will guide them to more responsible actions. 
Limited liability without responsibility has caused much of the trouble we see 
today.
37. Some people propose that capitalism be abolished. Richard Moore opined, 
"that if we put the necessary democratic and environmental constraints on market 
economics, then we will have abolished capitalism." Others would go further to 
replace markets and private investment entirely.
38. Localized economic control should replace multinational corporate control. 
If there is local economic control, then democracy may continue as a healthy 
form of government. Locally elected leaders may come together as the democratic 
representatives in a confederation.
39. There should be a large international peace-keeping force under the control 
of the U.N. or some other agency that ensures equitable distribution of natural 
resources and peace, after all weapons of mass destruction have been destroyed.
40. Large numbers of people should reduce using energy sufficiently to let the 
power brokers know who really is in control. 
41. People could stop eating beef. Just in Central America alone 35 million 
people are now either landless or own too little land to support themselves 
while the transnational corporations have continued to drive the locals away and 
clear forest to raise beef cattle (1992 figures).


4

Making Monetary Systems Work to Benefit People


This chapter asserts that control of the world's finances by major banks and 
corporations, in league with the International Monetary Fund, must be broken. 
The IMF acts to protect banks and speculators from losses due to bad judgment, 
while pressuring borrowing governments to take actions that favor penetration by 
multinational corporations and curtailment of government protections for its 
citizens. Also considered are concentration of financial power, mismeasurement 
of GDP, and the merits of local currencies.

There is an old saying that "money makes the world go round." It reflects the 
extent to which control of money determines so much else that happens on this 
planet. Presidents of the United States like to be described as "the leader of 
the free world." Other holders of public office throughout the world likewise 
consider themselves "in control." In reality they often are merely responding to 
the pressures and carrying out the wishes of those who control the money. 

Wealth is known to be quite concentrated, although recent global figures are 
hard to find, especially for wealth rather than income. According to a recent 
study by World Bank economist Branko Milanovic, about 50 million people who made 
up the top one percent in the world's five billion population had 9.5% of the 
world's income in 1993. That was more than the whole bottom half who had only 
8.5% (published January 18, 2002, in the Economic Journal).

The contrast among nations is shown by figures compiled in  1992  by  the  
United  Nations  Development Program (UNDP). They found that the 20% of the 
world's people who live in the world's wealthiest countries received 82.7% of 
the world's income, while only 1.4% of the world's income went to the 20% who 
live in the world's poorest countries.

In the United States, headquarters of many of the multinational corporations, 
the top 5% of U.S. families received 20.3% of total money income in 1996, and 
the top fifth, 46.8%, while only 4.2% went to the bottom fifth. As for wealth, 
Federal Reserve figures for 1989 showed that the richest 1% of American 
households accounted for nearly 40% of the nation's wealth, and the top 20% 
accounted for 80% of the wealth.

Wherever figures are available, wealth turns out to be even more unevenly 
divided than income, and figures are hard to get because the wealthy prefer not 
to disclose that information. Not only wealth is concentrated, but also power. 

Such banking families as Rothschild, Morgan, and Rockefeller have long exerted a 
powerful influence on public policy, including the financing of wars. In modern 
times, control is largely exercised by major financial houses and huge 
corporations whose interests are promoted by the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), the World Bank, agencies for export financing, and regional development 
organizations.

There is much confusion about the functions of the IMF and the World Bank. Both 
were created at the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944 during World War II. The 
original and officialF name of the World Bank is the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development, which is a better description of its purpose. 
Instead of being a bank in the usual sense, it was intended to provide financial 
aid by making and insuring loans where needed to promote economic recovery 
throughout the world. Ostensibly,  it is still pursuing that  objective,  but 
its methods have been criticized as counterproductive and its management has 
acknowledged that reform is needed.

The IMF's original function, on the other hand, was to maintain fixed and stable 
exchange rates among the currencies of member nations. This was largely based on 
a standing offer of the United States to other governments that it would buy or 
sell gold at a fixed price of $35 per ounce from its huge hoard at Fort Knox. 
When that policy was dropped and national currencies were allowed to "float" in 
the l970s, the IMF found a new mission. It began to offer loans to developing 
countries with strings attached, and later added guarantees of loans by 
international private banks with similar conditions attached.

When a currency crisis occurs now, as it did in Asia late in 1997 and in 
Argentina in 2002, for example, the IMF remedy is to demand austerity and 
deregulation in exchange for additional loans or loan extensions. Its policies 
are thus in step with those of the World Bank for "structural adjustment" that 
have caused such opportunities for big business and disasters for local 
populations as described in Chapter 3.

In the Asian crisis, for example, the global financial powers hastily put 
together a rescue package, bailing out the unwise investments of banks and 
others. South Korea, one of the major recipients of funding, did not punish 
corrupt politicians involved in the crisis, but agreed to give foreign 
corporations more access to its domestic market, open its bond market, and speed 
up the opening of branch offices by foreign banks and stock companies. In 
addition the IMF arrogantly insisted that all candidates in South Korea's 
presidential elections endorse the IMF bailout agreement. 

Another method of dealing with currency crises has been propping up of national 
currencies by foreign exchange operations of governments or their central banks 
at the expense of the public. Experience   has   shown   that   such  efforts  
have only  temporary effects at great cost. An example was the vain and costly 
effort in 1992 by central banks in England and Germany to support a weak British 
pound. This was the time George Soros' hedge fund won an estimate $1 billion 
profit betting the banks would not succeed. The British pound fell 41% in eleven 
months, as measured against the Japanese yen, and Britain had to withdraw from 
the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) for stabilizing European currencies. On 
another occasion, more than $50 billion of US taxpayers' money was used to 
bolster the Mexican peso at the end of 1994, mainly benefiting Wall Street 
financial interests.

One answer to the crises caused by such speculation in currencies could be the 
tax proposed by the late Nobel-Prize-winning Yale economist James Tobin that 
would discourage currency speculation by making it less profitable. His proposal 
is promoted by Attac, a 27,000-member organization in France, the Association 
for the Taxation of Financial Transactions for the Aid of Citizens. The Tobin 
tax at one-quarter percent would raise about $250 billion a year, exceeding five 
times all current international aid, but could not be levied by any single 
country without causing financial companies to move to more permissive venues.

Another proposal to stabilize exchange rates would be to base currencies on 
actual commodities rather than existing credit money that is subject to risk by 
the herd mentality that drives speculators. 

Money has come almost exclusively under the control of privately owned banks. 
The history of money runs from barter without money, to commodities used to 
define the value of other goods, and to rare items such as gold and silver 
generally accepted as payment for other goods and services. Then governments 
started making coins of gold and silver as a convenient means of insuring purity 
and accurate weight.

The next development was for goldsmiths in the Middle Ages to accept gold for 
safekeeping, issuing paper documents as receipts, which were found to be more 
convenient to carry than the actual metal. This led to the discovery by 
goldsmiths that these receipts, which were in effect paper money, remained in 
circulation for considerable times before being used to claim the precious 
metal, and so they issued receipts for more gold than they actually had.

These receipts were issued to borrowers who were expected to repay the amount 
with interest. Loaning at interest being forbidden by the Christian church at 
that time, this banking operation became an attractive trade for Jews.

Meanwhile, governments began to issue paper money that promised redemption in 
precious metals, usually gold. They also, in time, discovered they could get 
away with issuing more paper than they had gold reserves to back up. Most, 
perhaps all, currency throughout the world is now redeemable only for more 
paper, and its purchasing power depends wholly on public confidence.

Banks also discovered that they could create money in another form by simply 
crediting a customer's account with a balance equal to the amount of a loan 
document signed by the customer. Just as goldsmith's receipts were not all 
claimed at once, the balances in customers' bank accounts are not all claimed at 
once. Thus the banks are able to issue such credits amounting to many times the 
bank's capital, the ratio being set by bank regulators.

With the purchasing power of currency depending entirely on public confidence 
(and the herd mentality of Wall Street), it is apparent that the structure is 
extremely fragile. If the public fears run-away inflation, a run on banks is 
likely. To build confidence and to ensure that banks' profits from interest are 
not eroded over time, central banks take deflationary measures whenever there is 
a hint of inflation and regardless of the calamitous rise in unemployment that 
often occurs. 

As another way of maintaining public confidence, central banks also call on the 
government to bail out (with public funds) financial firms deemed "too big to 
fail." This allows bankers to take bigger risks, with profits going to the 
bankers while debts and bank failures are at the expense of the public. 

The important interest rate decisions are made outside the structures of 
government that are answerable to the public. In the United States, whose 
dollars have become the de facto medium for international exchange, the Federal 
Reserve Board sits atop a banking hierarchy. Its members are insulated from 
government by long  overlapping  term  appointments  and  control the 12 
regional Federal Reserve Banks that actually issue the U.S. currency and whose 
shares are owned by other banks. FRB Chairman Alan Greenspan, first appointed by 
President Reagan, has become possibly the most powerful influence on the world 
economy.

The results of monetary policy exercised by the central banks to counter 
business cycles are usually judged by the rate of inflation, imperfectly 
measured, and by economic growth, measured very imperfectly by Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP). As noted in Chapter 1, that measure is seriously flawed. 

For example, when a mother pays for child care, transportation, and outside 
meals, so she can work for wages, both her wages and expenses are counted in 
GDP, but her previous work in the home was not counted. Also, environmentally 
destructive activities are counted in GDP, as are the costs of repairing or 
counteracting the destruction. 

For more detail, see Beyond Globalization by Hazel Henderson  (Kumarian  Press,  
1999),  chapter 2,  and Playing with the Numbers by Richard A. Stimson 
(Westchester Press, 1999), chapter 3 (www.stimson.homestead.com).  

The Bank of England and the new European Central Bank now have similar autonomy 
and the same "neo-liberal" economic philosophy as the FRB, the World Bank, and 
the IMF. The result is the policy of "scarce money" and people who are willing 
to work remain unemployed because potential customers for the goods they would 
produce lack the money to buy them, and businesses will not hire workers if 
there is no market for the products.

Economist Stuart Chase explained this in 1934 during the Great Depression when 
millions wanted to work and could not find jobs, the rich were hoarding money or 
buying property at distress prices, mortgages were being foreclosed, and there 
were runs on banks: 

"The ten million unemployed in this country...would gladly take a volume of 
goods which would make factory wheels hum.  The factory wheels are silent 
because the unemployed have no money." Chase went on to observe that production 
could keep on rolling if somehow people could be provided with cash. But that is 
"inflation" if people are equipped with money outside the "rules of the game." 
Those rules require that private bankers control the supply of money, 
manufacturing it by issuing business loans and crediting checking accounts.
"Private bankers cry to high heaven," Chase noted, "when the government proposes 
to create some money of its own against, let us say, public works.  Why is this 
more reprehensible than creating money against a shoddily built apartment house 
which may never be rented?"

During that Great Depression another form of money was invented by 
municipalities when their tax receipts were insufficient to pay  teachers, 
police,  firemen,  and other employees.  Instead of legal tender they printed 
other pieces of paper called "scrip," that the cities would accept for tax 
payment and many local merchants agreed to accept. This expedient allowed many 
city workers to remain employed and merchants to pay their property taxes and to 
trade with each other. Although scrip became very successful in some places, the 
banks got it abolished as soon as they could.

Similar arrangements have been created among buyers and sellers without the use 
of government-created currency or bank-created credit. They were especially 
useful to decrease unemployment and business failures during the 1980s 
recession. Computer software is now available that enables people to break the 
type of impasse described by Stuart Chase. 

One of the best known of "community currency" systems is the rapidly spreading 
"usury-free" LETS [Local Employment Trading System-sometimes called Local 
Exchange Trading System] of Michael Linton who lived in the Comox Valley on 
Vancouver Island in British Columbia, Canada, where many people were unemployed 
due to a money shortage. They trade their goods and services for those of others 
in the system, thus creating their own money. (www.cyberclass.net) 

The LETS system is based on a "mutual credit" system proposed by Silvo Gesell in 
the early 1900s. While these systems remain clearly local, there are proposals 
to turn them into national systems such as that proposed by J. Walter Plinge 
(http://ebean390.tripod.com/drwalt.htm). 

Other community currencies have also been developed, for which the "Ithaca 
Hours," established at Ithaca, New York (www.lightlink.com/hours/ithacahours), 
has become the model. This differs from mutual credit systems as it is a pure 
fiat currency.  The RGT currency, similar to Ithaca Hours, afforded extensive 
bypassing of official currency during the recent crisis in Argentina. 

Similar systems exist in Brazil, Uruguay, Chile, and Spain 
(www.cyberclass.net/argentina.htm).

While many community currencies fail to provide for long-term borrowing, the 
long-established Swiss WIR (Wirtschaftsring-Genossenschaft-German for economic 
cooperative) and Swedish JAK (Jord, Arbete, Kapital-Swedish for land, labor, 
capital) systems are said to have resolved this problem. 

JAK began as a cooperative savings and loan association in 1965 and was granted 
official bank status by the Swedish government in 1997, resulting in members' 
savings being covered by deposit guarantees. According to its official web site, 
it has over 21,000 members served by 80 trained volunteers in an interest-free 
banking system, whose main purpose is to provide interest-free loans to members. 
They also are able to earmark their savings for designated local enterprises. 
JAK has a commitment to "spreading information about the ill effects of the 
prevailing interest-bearing monetary system." (www.jak.se - in English) 

WIR, under the Swiss federal banking law since 1936, and known as WIR Bank since 
1998, grew out of an economic cooperative founded in 1934 as a result of the 
Great Depression. It attempted to relieve the money shortage, or liquidity 
crisis, by applying the concept of "interest-free money" from liberal economic 
theory, which was opposed to charging interest and led to the concept that idle 
money should depreciate. At that time of crisis, according to the history given 
on the WIR web site (www.wir.ch), associations were formed in the United States, 
Europe, and throughout the world, for the exchange of goods (barter) among 
members, and WIR was patterned on a Nordic model.

When the Depression was over, other such cooperatives disappeared. WIR 
continued, but the ideal of interest-free money was  abandoned  and  modest  
interest  charged for  WIR  loans and paid on participations in the cooperative. 
However, holdings in WIR money still do not bear interest. The idea of charging 
a tax on idle money was never actually applied. The principle of mutual aid 
among participants remains a priority.

In 1992-98 WIR Bank revised its capital structure, entered commercial activity 
in new market segments, began global financing of building construction in 
combined accounts of WIR credits and Swiss francs. In 2000 it offered services 
to the general public in Swiss francs. (www.wir.ch - French, German, and Italian 
versions).

In addition to community currencies are proposals for commodity-backed 
currencies for the purpose of resolving inequities in foreign currency 
exchanges. Early proposals came from Walter Bagehot in 1872 and later from Ralph 
Borsodi and J. M. Keynes in the early 1900s.  Modern examples include the Terra 
of Bernard Lietaer, a former senior executive of the central bank of Belgium, 
expressed as a specified basket of raw materials, and a proposal made by J. W. 
Smith.  

Entrepreneurs seeking to start or expand a business can get financing from banks 
or issuance of corporate bonds only with the promise of paying interest. The 
alternative seems to be to offer equity, or a share of the profits, rather than 
interest payments, as is said to be allowed in Islamic banking where interest or 
"usury" is forbidden by religion (as it once was in Christianity). 

Unless systems such as those described above can grow rapidly to replace 
conventional banking and fiat money, there still remains the need to reform the 
national and international systems that dominate the world economy. For a 
comprehensive overview of alternate money systems, see Strohalm's Links to 
Economic Change (http://www.strohalm.nl/bookmarks/alles.htm).

The following proposals were submitted to the forum members as a summary of 
those on which all were thought to agree:

1. Control of the world's finances by major banks and corporations, in league 
with the International Monetary Fund, must be broken. The IMF acts to protect 
banks and speculators from losses due to bad judgment, while pressuring 
borrowing governments to take actions that favor penetration by multinational 
corporations and curtailment of government protections for its citizens. 
2. Any international organizations such as IMF, the World Bank, and various 
regional development agencies that make grants or loans to assist nations in 
financial crises should not be under the exclusive control of bankers; they 
should be responsible and accountable to elected representatives of the world's 
people. The agents of major banks and corporations tend to do what is in their 
own interest rather than that of the affected populations.
3. No such organizations should be allowed to operate in secret, and they should 
be required to consult with non-governmental organizations; otherwise, 
conditions imposed on recipients may have onerous consequences that are unknown 
to the public until too late.
4. These international organizations must not require any nation, as a condition 
of aid, to curtail any services or protections it affords its people, or to sell 
off any government operations to private companies. There have been past 
instances when well-run government operations were forcibly privatized with 
resulting price increases, loss of employment and/or damage to the environment. 
5. Nor should these agencies require recipients to charge fees for children to 
attend school and for people to access basic health services. User fees for 
education discourage school attendance and user fees for health services lead to 
preventable death and disease.
6. These international organizations must also not require actions that favor 
penetration by multinational corporations in preference to local economic 
activity. Such actions have often deprived inhabitants of their traditional use 
of land and forced them to seek a living in the cities after they were driven 
off their land by armed forces or by poisoning of their streams with industrial 
waste, such as cyanide used in gold mining.
7. The "neo-liberal" economic approach that permeates these agencies must be 
overcome; the attitude of their bankers and multinational corporate allies 
places greater importance on rights of banks and corporations than on the 
liberties and economic welfare of the population. 
8. Competition must be restored to the financial world by breaking the grip of 
monopolistic chains of banks, stockbrokers, and insurance companies that have 
crowded out independent entities and formed dangerous financial corporations 
across national and functional boundaries. In recent years these chains have 
grown, not mainly by providing better service to customers, but through mergers 
and acquisitions contrary to the intent of antitrust laws in various nations. 
The US Congress, after receiving many favors and contributions from financial 
firms, repealed the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 and allowed banks again to sell 
financial securities and insurance.
9. Local mediums of exchange should be encouraged to reduce dependence on 
national currencies, international bankers, and manipulated exchange rates.   
Scrip not issued by governments or banks has been successfully introduced in 
some localities, including LETS (Local Employment/Exchange Trading System).
10. Likewise, mutual credit and barter in situations where appropriate should 
weaken the grip of the dominant financial institutions. New information 
technologies are making these arrangements more feasible.
11. Production should be measured without the errors of present Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) calculations, which, among other things, ignore value produced 
outside the money economy, such as work in the home, and count the destruction 
of natural resources as production.
12. Governments and non-governmental organizations should encourage employee 
ownership of businesses, thus guarding against shortsighted policies of absentee 
ownership. Banks must not be allowed to dictate the selection of management, as 
is often the case at present.

Other proposals supported by many or most forum members:

13. Nations that owe crushing debt because of past international banking 
policies need relief from that debt. International efforts should be made to 
recover funds diverted from those countries by leaders who embezzled them, and 
new grants or loans should be offered only when conditions are met to safeguard 
them from misuse. A bank that lends, without precautions, to a military dictator 
who then absconds with the money leaving his citizenry holding the debt is a 
predatory lender. International predatory lending laws could absolve poor 
citizens from repayment of such debt. 
14. Private banks and bankers, necessarily having a vested interest in monetary 
decisions, must not be in control of central banks; and they must not be allowed 
to cause widespread unemployment by raising interest rates on the pretext of 
inflation risk.
15. Banks and money systems are the public's economic infrastructure like roads, 
rivers, and airspace. Bankers should be trustees with a fiduciary duty to be 
devoid of self-interest and to operate banks for the sole benefit of the 
communities and nations in which they operate. Banks should never be run for 
private profit, and  no country should permit foreign nationals to own their 
banks.
As a fiduciary operation, no bank should be allowed to engage in speculation in 
currency or other instruments.
16. National currencies must not be propped up by foreign exchange operations of 
governments or their central banks at the expense of the public. Experience has 
shown that such efforts have only temporary effects at great cost. 
17. Instead of financing government services by taxes that are mostly imposed on 
productive activity, funds should be obtained by taxes and/or fees on 
externalized costs (pollution, health hazards, environmental damage, etc.) and 
financial transactions (via the Tobin tax). To prevent corporations from 
escaping taxation these charges should be imposed at the global level, partly 
financing worldwide needs and partly apportioned to member states. The benefits 
would be relief of existing taxes on useful work, discouragement of operations 
harmful to humans and the environment, and limitation of speculation in 
currencies and financial instruments that amounts to gambling and disrupts 
normal commerce. 
18. The development of currencies-local, national, or worldwide-based on actual 
commodities rather than existing fiat money should be encouraged, along with 
mutual credit systems.
19. Support and encourage the restoration of a "mixed system" in which private 
businesses, producer cooperatives, consumer cooperatives, and government 
agencies all played their part prior to the ascendancy of the "Chicago School" 
disciples of Milton Friedman.
 

5

Democratizing the Communications Media

(based on a summary by Liane Casten in Chicago with Richard Stimson)


Concentrated ownership and control is dangerous enough in other areas, but it is 
especially harmful with regard to communications media. That is because it 
allows a few powerful people to limit and distort what information other people 
receive.

In 1999, when there were still some restrictions media moguls were trying to 
break down, Rupert Murdoch and his Australian company, News Corporation, 
controlled over 70% of the press in Australia, and over 35% in Britain. They 
also had the New York Post, the Village Voice, New York magazine, the Boston 
Herald, the Chicago Sun-Times, the Twentieth Century Fox film studio, and 
Metromedia television stations in the United States, as well as satellite 
television in much of the world.

Time-Warner and Bertelsmann AG were then making major acquisitions, and the 
three traditional US television networks (before Murdoch's Fox) were in the 
hands of General Electric, Westinghouse, and the Disney Corporation.

By 2002 the monopolistic tendency had gone much further and information was 
increasingly dominated by entertainment. Viacom, owner of Paramount motion 
picture studios, book publishers, MTV and other cable channels, replaced 
Westinghouse as owner of the CBS television network. A special issue of The 
Nation (January 7-14, 2002) contained a color chart summarizing the holdings of 
the "Big Ten" corporations that make up the media cartel.

These media-controlling corporations were shown to have revenues ranging from 
AT&T's $555 billion and General Electric's $130 billion down to Bertelsmann's 
$17 billion and News Corporation's $12 billion. The chart showed many joint 
ventures and percentage shares of ownership involving various of the ten 
companies.

Since, at least in the United States, polls have shown that most people rely on 
television for their news, that medium has special importance. The Big Ten 
generally include both the studios that produce content with the channels that 
disseminate it. Al Franken, one of several people "The Nation" asked to comment 
on the chart, explained how this happened.

"In 1995 the networks prevailed after years of fierce lobbying before Congress" 
in having the financial interest and syndication rules (fin-syn) rescinded that 
had prevented networks from owning more than a certain percentage of the shows 
they aired. Now, he wrote, "The same people who are scheduling the shows are 
making the shows, so what you see reflects the tastes of fewer and fewer 
people."
 
The principle that content and distribution should be kept independent of each 
other is also breached with regard to DVDs (digital video discs). CSS (Content 
Scrambling System) prevents copying of DVDs and any software used for playing 
back DVDs must pay the major studios for a license. The world is split into six 
regions with DVD discs and players that are incompatible with those in other 
regions. Similarly, the incompatibility of television systems (and camcorders) 
in different parts of the world serves commercial interests at the expense of 
public convenience.

A major political victory for the media oligarchy was the Telecommunications 
Reform Act of 1996. Overwhelmingly supported by both major parties, it 
effectively removed virtually all limits in the communications and entertainment 
industries.   Congress  also  extended  the  duration  of  patents  and 
copyrights, allowing firms like Disney to milk the profits from artistic work 
long after the originator is dead.

The industry's political power is phenomenal. According to the Center for Public 
Integrity the fifty largest media companies and four of their trade associations 
spent $111.3 million between 1996 and mid-2000 for Washington lobbying, not 
counting millions of dollars in campaign contributions.

All of the Big Ten in the chart have television holdings, including multiple 
channels and production facilities for content. General Electric, for example, 
has the NBC network and percentage shares in cable channels that include CNBC, 
MSNBC, A&E, History, Biography, AMC, Bravo, plus stakes in regional channels, 
Europe and Asia. Disney, with six production companies, 30 television stations, 
the ABC network, and Disney channels in over 140 countries, also has shares in a 
half-dozen other channels, plus theme parks in California, Florida, Paris, 
Tokyo, and Hong Kong.

AT&T, with 60 million US telephone customers and 5 million corporate clients 
worldwide, also distributes television programs in 175 countries, has shares in 
television channels in the US, Asia, Europe, Canada, and South America. It is 
the largest cable company pending a $47 billion sale to Comcast.

In the print media category, AOL/Time-Warner has more than 40 magazines and 
three book publishing companies, plus a stake in the Book-of-the-Month Club. It 
is is the leading consumer magazine publisher in Britain. Bertelsmann, the 
biggest broadcaster and main film producer in Europe, has 11 daily newspapers in 
Germany and Eastern Europe, many magazines in Europe and the US, and is the 
largest book publishing conglomerate in the US with Knopf, Random House, Modern 
Library, and Doubleday.

The dominance of entertainment over information is illustrated by the film 
studios, libraries, and cinemas they own: Warner Bros. (AOL/Time-Warner),  
Viacom (Paramount and other studios plus cinema theaters in US, Canada, Europe, 
Asia, and South America), Disney, News Corporation (Twentieth Century Fox), SONY 
(Columbia Pictures, Screen Gems, Loew's Theaters), Vivendi Universal (Universal, 
world's second largest film library, and 3 cinema theater companies), and 
Liberty Media Corp. (spun off from AT&T, has shares in six movie companies). 

Music distribution is also important to AOL/Time-Warner, Bertelsmann, SONY, 
Vivendi Universal, and Liberty Media. Many of the companies have theme parks and 
professional sports teams. Further interests range from General Electric's 
nuclear reactors and financial services, through Disney's cartoon merchandise, 
to Vivendi Universal's hundreds of recycling, landfill, and incinerator sites 
worldwide, plus 220 advertising agencies in 66 countries.

Internet involvement of the Big Ten includes Bertelmann's search engines, 
Internet service in Europe by Bertelmann and Vivendi Universal, AOL/Time-
Warner's AOL and Compuserve Internet service, SONY's Internet service in Japan, 
and many websites related to their television channels.

Access to the Internet is overwhelmingly through computers running Microsoft's 
Windows operating system and its Explorer net browser. This virtual monopoly was 
achieved by methods ruled by US courts to be illegal restraint of trade under 
the antitrust laws. Unlike the open-source Linux system, Windows keeps its 
source code secret and Microsoft uses its market strength to get its way with 
computer manufacturers and software applications companies. 

Media companies and other owners of "intellectual property" have not only 
extended the duration of copyrights but also used the patent laws beyond their 
original intention. Software patents that forbid copying the programmer's code 
are reasonable, but patents are being granted for the "method" of achieving a 
goal, even if different code is created. Software patents are often just 
elementary applications of mathematics or generic concepts. 


Inventors have long understood that patent law did not allow patenting a device 
that any competent mechanic could create. Under corporate political pressure, 
patent grantors, at least in the U.S., seem to have forgotten the traditional 
limitations and accepted outrageous extensions (even to the extent of patenting 
living organisms and traditional native remedies).

Media problems have been discussed on the Blue Ear Forum, which consists mostly 
of journalists and writers around the world. A guest participant was Robert 
McChesney of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, author of "Rich 
Media, Poor Democracy" (University of Illinois Press, 1999), a book that dealt 
with many of the issues discussed in this chapter. Further information can be 
found at www.robertmcchesney.com.

In another book with co-author John Nichols, "It's the Media Stupid" (Seven 
Stories Press, 2000) they declared: "No, the media system is not the sole cause 
of our political crisis, nor even the primary cause, but it reinforces every 
factor contributing to the crisis, and it fosters a climate in which the 
implementation of innovative democratic solutions is rendered all but 
impossible." 

When "The Nation" published its special issue with the chart showing the 
holdings of the Big Ten, discussion on Blue Ear heated up and Jay Rosen of 
Columbia University chided members for not differentiating between ownership and 
control, and for implying that control was so complete it was hopeless to oppose 
it. He asserted that freedom of expression of those in the forum belied their 
claims of media control. 

After various members of that forum responded to Rosen questioning whether he 
had any concern about recent developments affecting the media, however, he 
admitted concern and declared: 

"I'm worried about the rise of market values to a position where they trump all 
other values, such as public service, professionalism, truth, accuracy, genuine 
art, genuine popular culture, honesty, ethics. I think that dismantling the 
regulatory powers of the Federal government over broadcasting was a cave-in to 
major media corporations, and fully in line with the Republican party's agenda 
during those years, which was to evacuate any notion of the public interest 
beyond the 'verdict of the marketplace.'"

The tight control of the communications media by major corporations leaves a few 
cracks and crevices, as Rosen pointed out, where information can seep through, 
such as Internet forums, small circulation publications, letters to the editor, 
local access cable channels, and occasional documentaries on public television 
or even some commercial TV reports.

Overall, though, the information most people receive avoids issues about which 
the corporations owning the media (or their advertisers) are uncomfortable. 
Several examples will illustrate this point.

Very little has been revealed about dioxin as the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) has kept the scientific results of dioxin reassessment bottled up 
under both Clinton and Bush. Miniscule amounts are extremely harmful to humans. 
One source of dioxin is the bleaching with chlorine of newsprint-not something 
the major newspapers want to talk about. Dioxin is a component of Agent Orange, 
whose connection with illnesses of Vietnam veterans was long covered up by 
government and media.

Another public health hazard that has been kept under wraps is the presence of 
bovine growth hormones (BGH) in milk and other dairy products in the U.S. They 
are causative for breast, prostate, and colon cancer, and diabetes according to 
studies in such peer-reviewed journals as "Lancet" and "Science." They are in 
school lunch programs in the United States but banned in Canada and the European 
Union. Political connections of Monsanto, the only maker of these hormones, may 
explain why the EPA and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have not acted. 
When two television reporters at a Fox station in Florida tried to report the 
dangers of BGH, they were fired.

One more of many possible examples is that much of the nuclear radiation 
continually leaching into water tables and communities is from polluted sites 
never cleaned up by General Electric. Since that company owns NBC, no disclosure 
can be expected there. Some of the major media have been unable to avoid 
mentioning the dioxin in the Hudson River that GE refuses to clean up.

In the political arena, U.S. television networks allowed a commission of the 
Republican and Democratic parties to exclude candidates of other parties from 
the presidential debates in 2000. In fact, the Green Party candidate, Ralph 
Nader, was forcibly excluded from the room. 

There is a website completely devoted to media censorship, which can be found at 
www.projectcensored.org. Free emails about items under-covered in the press can 
be obtained by subscription and the media research group issues an annual list 
of under-covered over-covered news items. The director of Project Censored is 
Dr. Peter Phillips, Associate Professor of Sociology at Sonoma State University 
in California.

Media coverage of news can be influenced by considerations of patriotism, (not  
only in the  United States). According to Phillips, "Marc Herold, an economics 
professor at the University of New Hampshire compiled a summation of the death 
toll in Afghanistan-saying that over 4,000 civilians died from U.S. bombs-more 
than died at the World Trade Center. Yet only a handful of newspapers covered 
his story."

Phillips also noted that both the BBC and the Times of India published reports 
several months before 9-11 that the U.S. was then planning an invasion of 
Afghanistan. The Unocal oil pipeline from the Caspian Sea region was to be built 
through Afghanistan and the U.S. needed a cooperative government in power. He 
cited report from France regarding how the Bush administration, shortly after 
assuming office, slowed down FBI investigations of al-Qaeda and terrorist 
networks in Afghanistan in order to deal with the Taliban on oil. These, and 
other suspicious matters including the millions of dollars made on pre-9-11 put 
options on United and American Airlines stocks, have largely been ignored by the 
mainstream US news media.

Liane Casten was appointed by Project Censored  as one of the national judges to 
select the 12 most censored stories of the year 2001. After reviewing the 26 
contenders, she wrote:

"Power corrupts; absolute power corrupts absolutely. When the media become the 
self-serving gatekeepers that lock out from public scrutiny reports of 
government and corporate corruption or criminality, then here is little left but 
the runaway consolidation and nearly complete corruption of media power. Thanks 
to FCC chair, Michael Powell, and the present administration, the grip - in 
process since the Telecommunication Act of 1996, has only become tighter. 
Blather, public relations and propaganda take the place of significant 
information, while a corporate agenda now insinuates itself into the classrooms 
- affecting ever younger and younger minds.  Children are being trained for the 
marketplace, not the polling place. Critical thinking and vigorous debate are 
becoming unpatriotic.
"When we have media conglomerations now aligned with the power structure -- in 
all their varied and myriad connections, (from regulators to profiteers) we have 
the perfect blanket that covers over the rapaciousness, the greed, and the 
immoral indifference to human life that constitutes any definition of evil. With 
no public scrutiny, both corporations and the government can go about their 
business of keeping the world safe for Silicon Valley's technologies, for 
McDonnell Douglas's newest killing machine, for Coca Cola's and Nike's third 
world labor policies and pay structures, or for Occidental Petroleum's pipeline 
to oil. 
"And this true agenda is being carried out with greater arrogance and abandon 
because the mainstream media no longer report these crimes or hold the 
perpetrators accountable. Often the criminal perpetrators - like polluting 
Disney and GE --are the very corporations that own the media. The agenda is war 
(anywhere) and missile sales, not peace; profit now, not human health or a 
concern for the future of this planet.

"While the US. military is making the world safe for U.S. capitalism, and while 
it destroys everything in its wake in the process-from local resources to human 
lives, our own country and indeed the world continues to pay a devastating 
price. Whole generations in the U.S. and abroad are now suffering, are 
butchered, starved and manipulated into poverty and whole generations will 
continue to suffer and be manipulated by forces beyond their control, unreported 
and ignored by most media outlets. As Bob McChesney wisely stated, 'The 
corruption of the system would be difficult to exaggerate.'"
There is also a organization dedicated to "Fairness & Accuracy  in  Reporting"  
(FAIR),   that  has  email  notices  and  a website www.fair.org to expose 
incomplete and/or inaccurate information in the media.

Members of the FixGov forum seem to have arrived at the following consensus on 
necessary reforms for the media:

1. Information media (including newspapers, magazines, books, television, radio, 
digital communication, and cinema) must be free of government censorship of 
facts and opinions. What are reasonable restrictions involving national security 
and decency will always be debatable. Governments tend to err on the side of too 
much restriction.
2. The media must also be free of censorship by commercial cartels, which have 
been concentrating ownership of all types of media across national boundaries, 
putting these corporations in position to block and/or distort information to 
suit their commercial and political interests. As many people recognize what is 
happening, public trust in the media is undermined. 
3. In the case of print media, full information and diversity of views is most 
likely to prevail when there is the maximum of competition. Government should 
not interfere with publication, but it should enforce strong antitrust laws to 
prevent economic power from driving out competition.
4. The broadcast media should likewise consist of independent television and 
radio stations, not having interlocking ownership and control with print media, 
and certainly not dominated by parent companies that are primarily interested in 
entertainment products and/or conflicting commercial activities.
5. Although the BBC has built a reputation for quality television and often 
broadcasts information displeasing to the government in power, it is dangerous, 
in general, for government to have a monopoly or dominance of the airwaves, as 
demonstrated in many countries where that situation has turned broadcasting into 
a government propaganda machine.
6. In the United States the Public Broadcasting System once provided a useful 
counterpoint to commercial television, but the attacks of Newt Gingrich on 
public television have largely converted it into an imitation of commercial TV 
with sponsored messages and promotional announcements. National Public Radio has 
retained more of its objectivity under this pressure.
7. Government does have an important role in broadcasting, however, because 
frequencies have been allocated under international agreement and the spectrum 
available in each country is controlled by government, unlike the unlimited 
possibilities for print media in a free society. Broadcast rights should be 
auctioned periodically for the highest bid offered by a responsible party 
guaranteeing to provide a public service in an equitable manner.
8. During election campaigns, in particular, broadcasters should be required to 
provide a reasonable amount of free time for political discussions with all 
candidates treated equally. There should also by something along the lines of 
the "Fairness Doctrine" formerly enforced by the United States Federal 
Communications Commission to require that if one point of view is presented on 
the air equal time must be given to opposing opinions.
9. A limit on commercial messages (including their own promotions) should be a 
condition of broadcast licenses, as it was until the 1980s in the United States, 
and certainly 100% commercial programs known as "infomercials" should be 
completely prohibited.
10. Newspapers and broadcasters need to be freed from the control of corporate 
cartels. Since the Telecommunications Act of 1996 there has been a parade of 
media mergers and over 4,000 radio  stations  have  been  bought  up  in the  
United  States,  while television networks are now in the hands of huge 
corporations like General Electric, Viacom, Disney, and Rupert Murdoch's News 
Corporation. Murdoch also controls large portions of the television and 
newspaper media in Great Britain, Australia, and elsewhere. Corporate media have 
done their best to hide corporate scandals and to downplay or distort any 
protests against corporations.
11. Material reported as coming from "think tanks" needs to be labeled with 
information about the bias of such sources. They generally claim to be 
nonpartisan research organizations, while actually slanting their writings 
toward one party or against other and showing little evidence of any objective 
research despite their tax-exempt status.
12. Because the mainstream media coverage of protests against WTO, IMF and World 
Bank abuses, such as at Seattle and Genoa and at the Republican and Democratic 
conventions, distorts the events (stressing violent actions and ignoring the 
message of peaceful protesters), it is important that independent media be able 
to continue reporting on www.indymedia.org and other Internet sites. The 
Internet itself must be kept free of control by governments and private 
monopolies.
13. Local organizations should be allowed to operate low-power radio as another 
means of conveying information independent of the media cartel. So far, the 
lobbying power of the National Association of Broadcasters with Congress and the 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has blocked such efforts in the United 
States on spurious claims of interference with commercial radio signals.
14. Writing letters to the editor of publications sometimes is a way of 
circulating information that is ignored in the news columns. Editors try to 
exhibit fairness by publishing letters expressing varied view, including ones 
disagreeing with the paper's editorial policy. Such letters may have little 
impact, but they can start people thinking.
15. It is important for individuals to get information "outside the box"--the 
television box, that is. The "infotainment" supplied by the media cartel tends 
to structure people's thinking in a way that makes them avid consumers with 
short attention spans and little interest in matters of substance. It builds and 
reinforces stereotypes (that some scientists label "memes" or "holodynes") that 
prejudice a person's thinking and reaction to new information.
16. There are dangers in the recent trend to protect corporate profits with the 
concept of "intellectual property" embodied in copyright extension long beyond 
the lifetime of the innovators, overreaching software patents, and international 
enforcement agreements. Unreasonable copyright and patent provisions need to be 
reversed.


"Public opinion in this country is everything."
-Abraham Lincoln, speech, Columbus Ohio, 1859

"You can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people some of 
the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time."
-Abraham  Lincoln, speech, 1856

"The great masses of the people in the very bottom of their heart tend to be 
corrupted rather than consciously and purposely evil...therefore, in view of the 
primitive simplicity of their minds, they more easily fall a victim to a big lie 
than to a little one, since they themselves lie in little things, but would be 
ashamed of lies that were too big."
-Adolph Hitler, as quoted by William Blum in "Rogue State, A Guide to the 
World's Only Superpower," p. 11.


6

The Spiritual Basis for Sustainable Living

(based on a summary by Richard Gauthier in Poland)


This chapter is a discussion of humankind's relationship with nature and the 
universe. It holds there is more to life than material possessions and 
indulgences. Although people differ in their beliefs about creation and 
divinity, most recognize goals and principles greater than personal 
satisfaction. Scientific advances and the initiatives spurred by the profit 
motive have raised the standard of living for many above mere survival. Excesses 
of greed and technology, however, can undermine quality of life. 

There are two sides to capitalistic materialism. It has had enormous success 
because it is furthering the progress of humankind. It permits the emancipation 
of humanity from the "prison of the earth," our natural condition. Scientific 
advances and the initiatives spurred by the profit motive have raised the 
standard of living for many above mere survival. 

However, excesses of greed and technology can undermine quality of life. Because 
excesses of capitalism have isolated humanity from nature by making it pleasure-
seeking, self-indulgent, and controlling, we must reestablish our relationship 
with nature and be aware of the unity in creation. 

To make the world a better place is the ambition of many people. Perhaps it 
comes from an innate feeling that life has a purpose and from a desire to give 
significance to one's presence on this planet. Such motives need to be awakened 
if the necessary global reforms are to be achieved. They are strengthened when 
people recognize powers in the universe greater than their own private 
interests.

Some moralists deny that there can be any good without belief in a supernatural 
being-sometimes in the precise form that they conceive God. They claim that non-
believers can only seek their own pleasure regardless of harm to others and that 
without religion there can be nothing but evil. (They tend to treat agnostics 
the same as atheists, although agnostics honestly admit they don't know while 
atheists flatly deny the possibility of God.)

Facts tend to contradict that assertion, as one can easily find good and bad in 
both the devout and the nonbelievers. When thinking of unselfish service to 
others, names that quickly come to mind include Dr. Albert Schweitzer, Mother 
Teresa, and Mahatma Gandhi, all motivated by traditional religion, and many 
others could be cited. Yet history is full of contrary examples, ostensibly 
devout people claiming God approved of their mistreatment of others, as in the 
case of the Crusades, the Inquisition, and apologists for slavery. Current 
examples include both sides in Northern Ireland, Hindus and Muslims in India and 
Pakistan, and Jewish and Arab extremists in the Middle East. It is also clear 
that commercial and colonial interests have often tired to cloak their selfish 
objectives behind a fa‡ade of religion.  

Among people rejecting conventional religion many have been admirable, as far 
back as Socrates, who was put to death in 399 BC for "neglect of the gods whom 
the city worships." A later example is Voltaire, a satirist and crusader against 
tyranny, bigotry, and cruelty. Like Thomas Jefferson and others, he was a 
"deist," one who believes in a supreme being but rejects religious orthodoxy. 
There is no shortage of villainous nonbelievers, either, obviously including 
Stalin and Mao Tse-tung.  

People of different religions and of no religion can cooperate together for 
good. What is important is for them to recognize freedom of thought. 
Unfortunately, when religion is authoritarian (whether fundamentalist Christian, 
orthodox Judaism, strict Islam, or any other) it elevates faith over thought and 
uses fear of damnation to enforce its particular set of beliefs. That would 
suggest God provided brains but does not want them to be used. 

With respect for the thoughts of other people, it is possible to draw on sources 
of inspiration from many cultures and from such inner resources as one may find. 
Although people differ in their beliefs about creation and divinity, most 
recognize goals and principles greater than personal satisfaction. Some 
scientific studies purport to have found a spiritual center in the brain that 
appears to have been affected by meditation and prayer as measured by brain wave 
scans.

The following is thought to express the consensus of the participants in 
creating this book:

1. Spirituality aids the elevation, evolution, and progress of all beings. 
2. Spirituality conceives of human beings as more than physical bodies, having 
individual souls, selves, minds and/or personalities. 
3. The goal of human life is seen to be realization of soul or self as one with 
infinity. 
4. Attainment of that goal represents fulfillment of all human longings. 
5. Conscious efforts to attain the infinite source may be called spiritual 
practices. 
6. Spiritual teachings, which provide guidance for spiritual practices, may come 
from internal (intuitional) and/or external sources.
7. Spirituality is universal and can be practiced at some level by anyone.
8. There is an attraction and family relationship among all human beings and 
other living beings due to their common spiritual origin and common spiritual 
destination. 
9. One has a duty in life to work for spiritual progress and to help others 
progress.
10. Human beings require basic physical necessities of life and helpful guidance 
in order to progress physically, mentally and spiritually. 
11. Society should make sure that all have access to these necessities and the 
opportunity to make such progress. 
12. All beings, including animals and plants, should be treated with love and 
respect.
13. In harming others, one harms oneself. In helping others, one helps oneself. 
14. Everyone has the right to protect themselves and others from harm. 
15. Deep changes can come from within the individual and then spread to others. 
15. A positive example is the best teacher. 
17. The human intellect must be liberated from narrow and dogmatic ideas and 
sentiments. 


7

Civil Society and Alternative Life Styles

(based on a summary by Bill Ellis in Maine, USA)


This chapter examines how directly democratic organization of society can bring 
people into better harmony with other life on the planet while avoiding the 
damage caused by large-scale exploitation of the environment. Some of the 
thoughts presented here were inspired by E. F. Schumacher's 1973 book, Small is 
Beautiful, and the lecture Bill Ellis gave before the E. F. Schumacher Society 
in 1998.

Today the people of the world are challenged with unprecedented problems as 
improper care for the earth's ecological systems threatens the planet's life 
support system and has brought us to the brink of collapse. At the same time 
soaring population places increasing demands on these fragile and interconnected 
systems. 

In addition, technological advances have made human labor forces increasingly 
irrelevant to the production of goods and thus delinked from the financial 
markets. As civilization proceeds from the industrial age into the age of 
knowledge millions of people may be left behind with no means of sustenance. 

As detailed in previous chapters, the powerful are proceeding down the path of 
globalization, disregarding the needs of people and the environment while 
enhancing the fortunes of the few (see Chapter 4). This has resulted in most of 
the world's wealth being concentrated while many millions of others worldwide 
suffer from unbearable poverty with hardships bordering on deliberate inhumane 
treatment.

Under what some refer to as the "dominator paradigm" prevailing over thousands 
of years, economic needs supercede the natural order of earth needs. Modern 
attempts to increase food production by the sale and  use  of  chemical  
fertilizers,  pesticides and herbicides, monocropping, and intensive meat 
production are largely responsible for increasing desertification as a result of 
worldwide topsoil losses. Since civilization itself is dependent upon the 
topsoil on which it rests, we are digging the foundation out from under our 
home. 

Now, inadequately tested bioengineering practices (genetically modified 
products), saturation of live stock with antibiotics, irradiation, and use of 
hormones to increase milk production introduce possible new dangers.  

As these problems become more evident, millions of individuals around the world 
are beginning to question the stability and security of our present systems and 
join with like-minded others to explore the situation. As a result there is a 
movement toward the creation of "sustainable living" societies based on 
decentralized financial systems, governance through bioregionalism, and 
lessening of dependence on world trade. 

Such people are sometimes described as "inner directed," "cultural creatives" 
and/or "integral culturists." They believe that competition is antithetical to 
sustainable living and insist on cooperation. A turn in the direction of 
sustainable living requires that society examine its old thought patterns and 
adopt lifestyles that more nearly fit the needs of today. Although such 
sustainable local or regional communities tend to be restricted in size, they 
can be linked with other communities in cooperative networks that have unlimited 
potential.

A vision of direct democracy-participatory democracy not under hierarchical 
control-was offered in a 1982 TRANET (transnational   network   
tranet@rangeley.org) editorial. Made possible by new technology and concepts, a 
future world government can be pictured as a network of networks in which each 
individual has multiple paths available to provide for his or her well-being and 
to influence world affairs. Various members would associate for special projects 
or issues but without any bureaucracy demanding action or conformity. 

The cells of this future of governance are emerging on many fronts. There are 
innovative social techniques such as Local Employment Trading Systems (LETS), 
CoHousing, Homesteading, Intentional Communitities, local scrips, food co-ops, 
Employee Stock Option Plans (ESOPs), Community Supported Agriculture (CSAs), and 
many others. Also hundreds of thousands of Grass Roots Organizations (GROs) are 
springing up around the world, solving local problems with local skills and 
local resources. They are no longer waiting for governments or corporations to 
solve their local problems and develop their local potentials. 

In the physical world, atoms, molecules, or cells, in sufficient numbers tend to 
form networks and special conglomerations. Simpler entities combine into larger 
ones. Elisabet Sahtouris, in Earth Dance: A Living System of Evolution, suggests 
that the human body with its cells organized into organs, and organs organized 
into a living being is a perfect metaphor for society. Ervin Laszlo and the 
Budapest Group carry the concept even further with their concept of "General 
Evolution."

The same pattern is being followed by civil society and the burgeoning GROs are 
following that pattern. Also, to support the network of GROs, Grassroots Support 
Organizations (GRSOs) are forming, most often by middle class professionals and 
technicians who recognize the inequities engendered by the current economic-
political system. GRSOs reach out to give in-kind assistance and to legitimize 
the actions of the peasants and disenfranchised in their bids for empowerment 
and local self-reliance. Techniques, technologies, information, and service from 
the industrial countries are supplied through links created by international 
non-governmental organizations (INGOs). 

Julie Fisher in The Road from Rio describes world wide network of GROs, GRSOs 
and INGOs in terms that fit perfectly into chaos and complexity theory. A living 
body of networked organizations has emerged to fill the niche produced by 
dysfunctional post-colonial governments. Interdependent social cells have 
developed organs assuming specialized functions that serve the whole 
social/political body that promises better life for the people in developing 
countries and the whole Earth. The natural laws being revealed in chaos, 
complexity, and Gaian theories, are working on the social level. 

As Elise Boulding pointed out in her book, Building a Global Civic Culture, the 
heart of a new world governance has already formed. Through the revelations of 
science, an understanding of the cosmic process is slowly emerging. With this 
new understanding, humanity may be participating in the creation of a 
sustainable and lasting civilization based on citizen participation in local 
community organizations-a Gaian global governance.

Modern forms of democracy are relatively new in human existence, and have never 
reached perfect form. Classical studies examine Athenian and Roman experience, 
in which important parts of the population were excluded from government. The 
prevailing system into the 18th Century was absolute monarchy, based on the 
"divine right of kings." Neither churches nor governments were friendly to the 
idea that common people could rule themselves, nor even participate in 
government. The ideas of voting, representation, legislating, human rights, 
politics, constitutions, or social contracts were little more than hazy academic 
notions. 

A landmark step was the curtailment of royal power in the Magna Carta imposed on 
King John of England in 1215 by the barons, which led,  after much travail,  to 
the modern constitutional monarchy in Britain, where traditions are preserved 
but power is effectively in the elected parliament. Over the years 
constitutional monarchies in which royal powers are limited have been 
established in other European countries.

By the 18th Century, masses of people recognized that they were missing out on 
many of the benefits that their toil had created. "It was the best of times, and 
the worst of times," as later described in Charles Dickens' The Tale of Two 
Cities. The American Revolution in 1776 and the French Revolution in 1789 
(interrupted by the emperor Napoleon and a restoration of Bourbon kings until 
another revolt in 1848) ushered in new concepts of democracy. 

Modern democracy came into being within what has been called the "Dominator 
Paradigm" based on the Genesis creation story holding that the earth was created 
for the use and domination of man. This was further developed by Greek 
philosophers. Then the Medieval Church and its "chain of being" put man near the 
top of a hierarchy, followed by women, children, other races, animals, plants, 
and the earth. In 1776 Adam Smith's laissez-faire economic theories held that 
the best for all would be produced by the self-interest of each through the 
operation of an "invisible hand." 

The American colonies had assumed a degree of self-government under the British 
Crown, but voting rights were usually denied women, blacks, Catholics, Jews, 
slaves, and anyone lacking substantial land holdings. Probably no more than 1/3 
of the adult free men could vote. Office holding was even more restricted, based 
on property ownership. Many of these limitations continued after the revolution. 
In spite of subsequent extended suffrage to blacks, women, and all citizens, the 
voice of the people has been steadily eroded as corporations have grown in size 
and power. (See Chapter 2.)

It is now possible to enter a new phase of democracy due to expanding civil 
society, modern technology, and a new scientific understanding of how evolution 
works. The theories of Chaos, Complexity and Gaia have a suggested a "Gaian 
Paradigm" in which the earth and all the cosmos evolve as a single unit, system, 
or "holon." Every entity of the universe is a unit composed of smaller units and 
embedded in larger units. The whole is dependent on every part, and each part is 
dependent on the whole, evolving in harmony and unison. Simple units combine to 
form more complex ones, which in turn combine in ever more complex forms.

Biological evolution is the most obvious example of the tendency toward the 
ordering of simple entities into more complex systems. Flexibility is one of the 
cardinal biological principles of evolution. Without flexibility a life form is 
not sustainable, it cannot change to meet new conditions. But governments, like 
corporations, have been organized within the Dominator Paradigm-good management 
means rigid order controlled from the top. 

That idea is contradicted by a best-selling book "Birth of the Chaordic Age" by 
Dee W. Hock, retired head of the Visa worldwide credit card company composed of 
more than 20,000 banks. He has been acclaimed for his successful management 
style that emphasizes choosing capable subordinates and letting them solve 
problems with their unique abilities instead of micro-managing them. He believes 
that successful systems thrive on the edge of chaos with just enough order to 
give them pattern, and calls this concept "chaordic" from a combination of chaos 
and order.

If society is to meet the challenges that face it, it needs to live closer to 
the edge of chaos. It must welcome a degree of disorder.   Democracy since its 
modern inception has suffered from its self-guilt of being inefficient. The 
Gaian Paradigm sees democracy in a very different light. The seeming weaknesses 
of democracy are its strength. The theories of Gaia, Chaos, and Complexity 
suggest that self-organizing on the edge of chaos is natural law. It requires 
the messy flexibility inherent in democracy. 

The rise of civil society, the burgeoning of GROs, the growth of social 
innovation, community involvement in meeting their own needs, are all parts of 
the progressive agenda provided by nature. We may not see clearly today the 
final organization which will emerge if we continue to build the decentralized 
autonomous communities linked together in worldwide mutual aid. But,  that is 
the way of cosmic evolution  as it is seen from the new worldview. It portends 
the emergence of a new phase of democracy-one in which people in community at 
the grassroots have a direct input to all decisions which affect their lives-a 
new form of global governance.



8

Education as an Essential Tool for Finding Solutions

(based on a summary by Bill Ellis in Maine, USA)


This chapter considers the limitations of traditional education and proposes 
lifetime learning that enables people to adapt to rapidly changing conditions. 
Such learning is less structured than traditional systems and reflects 
scientific discoveries about the non-linear functioning of the human brain. It 
turns away from the "dominator paradigm" that claims nature exists for 
exploitation by man in favor of the "gaian paradigm" that emphasizes interaction 
of living things. From neighborhood day care centers to home-schooling 
cooperatives, to senior hostels, new clubs and centers are creating the learning 
opportunities that could grow into a more human and humane learning system.

For democracy to work best the public should be literate and well educated in 
order to recognize the truth or falsity of political arguments. That is not an 
argument for voter qualifications because the individual, regardless of high or 
low intellectual development, is a better judge than anyone else of what is good 
for his or her welfare. However, it is an argument for providing universal 
education.

The political corruption and media concentration already discussed, as well as 
subsidized propaganda machines disguised as research organizations or "think 
tanks," make it all the more important for people to judge information 
critically. The prevalence of misinformation, including improper influences on 
university teaching, is exposed in "Playing with the Numbers: How So-called 
Experts Mislead Us about the Economy" by Richard A. Stimson (Westchester Press, 
1999, www.stimson.homestead.com). 

Particularly alarming is the incursion of commercial influences in the schools, 
especially in the United States, where commercial innovations often start. 
Endowments and research grants have been used by wealthy individuals and 
corporations to warp university activities. Athletic departments have come to 
overshadow academics as contracts with shoe companies and other equipment 
suppliers inflate the pay of coaches far above professors and even academic 
administrators. Most horrifying is that many school systems, in exchange for 
donations of electronic equipment, expose pupils in the classroom to mandatory 
television commercials from Channel One  (although others have laudably refused 
it). 

The growth of free public schools in the United States in the 19th century has 
been credited for much of the progress experienced by that country. The 
Industrial Age, spreading from a few factories in the Northeast, required that 
farmers and tradesmen learn new skills and new lifestyles. Their lives were 
controlled by the assembly line and the factory whistle instead of the weather 
and planting seasons. They were attracted by wages and urban conveniences not 
found in rural areas. 

To produce new generations of workers with industrial skills and a sense of 
discipline the new education system was created and, not wholly incidentally, 
gave the young a background of information that helped them become useful 
citizens of a democracy. This system served as a model for universal education 
in other advanced countries. The provision of government-financed higher 
education for veterans of World War II was a further documented success. 

Since then, there has been much more criticism of U.S. education. The Index of 
Leading Cultural Indicators by William Bennett reported that violent crime, 
allowing for population growth,  was  four to five times greater in 1994 than in 
1960, births among unmarried teenage girls were three times higher, and teenage 
suicide was nearly three times higher.  SAT scores in math dropped 20 points and 
verbal scores 50 points during the same years.

The National Science Foundation ranked the performance in physical sciences of 
United States 4th to 12th graders in eleventh world position, after six European 
and three Asian countries and Australia, with England and Hong Kong heading the 
list.

It has frequently been asserted by evangelical (fundamentalist) Christians that 
society's problems began when the Supreme Court banned prayer in the public 
schools. More correctly stated, the court banned religious indoctrination, 
including formal prayer, as a violation of the Constitution.  Nothing stops a 
student from praying privately to God, and it is safe to say that this often 
occurs at exam time and in athletic competition. Whether mandatory daily prayers 
formerly observed in the schools resulted in better behavior and learning is 
debatable, but there are certainly other explanations for the changes that have 
been observed.

David R. Boldt, The Philadelphia Inquirer, "Alarm Bell: Our smartest Until 
school psychologists, teachers, and teachers colleges began to stress peer 
approval, nobody had thought there could be any such thing as over-achievement.  
But then some school psychologists flabbergasted parents by asking whether they 
weren't worried that their children were ahead of the rest of the class!

Some educational weaknesses have a long history and certainly began before the 
1960s.  It is possible they expanded in that decade, but some risky ideas based 
on quack psychology and/or untried educational theories also surfaced in the 
1970s and 1980s, such as:

* Report cards that emphasize psychological opinions.
* Stress on social skills and conformity with peers.
* Reading by "look and say" rather than phonics.
* "New Math" involving set theory and non-decimal systems.
* De-emphasizing geography and history.
* Inflating grades to encourage "self-esteem."
* Weakening disciplinary measures available to teachers.
* Discouraging parents from spanking children.
* Social promotion.

However well intentioned these ideas, they all tended to undermine the schools' 
main mission of providing fundamental skills and subject-matter knowledge.  Some 
excellent work is done in teacher training institutions, but some ill-considered 
ideas also gain currency and can become dangerous fads.

Perhaps it is time for another revolution in education, as we face a new age of 
transition. Factories no longer dominate employment in the U.S. and many other 
developed nations. For example, only 3% or 4% of Americans now work on assembly 
lines. Traditional emphasis on training for jobs has suppressed people's natural 
curiosity and the joy of learning for its mere satisfaction. The appreciation 
and love for life for all individuals is dependent on their grasp of knowledge 
of the world and the world of knowledge. 

Neither in the economically powerful G8 nations, nor in the towns of less 
developed countries where multinational corporations have opened factories, is 
there the traditional pattern where father goes to work, mother keeps the home, 
and the children attend school. Today's world is a complex maze of ever-changing 
networks within networks. 

Communications have made it possible for books like this one to be written 
collectively by people living thousands of miles apart and never meeting one 
another face to face. Each person is a node of a network, simultaneously 
enmeshed in a myriad of interlinked communities and virtual communities. As 
social relations have become more complex, they have also become more 
changeable. 

Within the old social/economic/education system one could expect to learn in 
school all that was needed to hold a job.

Graduation was regarded as one's passport for a lifetime in the world of work. 
That is no longer true. Students in societies of advanced technology are told 
that they must expect to change jobs and careers several times in their lives. 
In other cultures, the way of life that had not changed for many generations may 
become impossible to follow because of manmade or natural changes in the 
environment.

It is no longer enough for schools to pass on the educational content needed for 
a job. It becomes far more important to develop versatility and the ability to 
adapt to new challenges. The learning system of the future must find ways to 
help people continue their education and intellectual growth.

The past few decades have seen an erosion of the traditional nuclear family (if 
it ever was), but the need for "belonging" to an extended family is still a 
basic need for all humans. A new form of intentional community is emerging that, 
with nurturing, can become the soul of society. Cooperative Community Life-Long 
Learning Centers (CCL-LLCs)-or Community Learning and Information Centers 
(CLICs)-can provide that critical social need. Information can be found at: 
http://www.creatinglearningcommunities.org/resources, http://www.clic-
manlius.org, http://www.tii-kokopellispirit.org, and http://www.ranui.org.nz.

Society today demands attention to interaction with other people. As business 
focuses more on information transfer than on the production of material goods, 
the social relationships take on a greater importance, involving who transmits 
information to whom and how. Social relationships are becoming more and more an 
element of working relationships.

Our interrelationships in the social world are not about just our economic well-
being. They are about the deeper more fundamental basic need of "belonging" -of 
caring and being cared for-of self-respect and self-actualization. Humans are 
again hearing that small inner voice that asks the questions such as "Why am I 
here?" and "What is the purpose of life?"

From the viewpoint of the individual, each is a node in the web of being, like a 
star reaching out from the most intimate connections to friends and family and 
branching out through other nodes to communities, society, and the natural 
world. As the branching stars get further and further away from the individual 
the links become ever weaker, and their importance to the individual seems ever 
more and more remote. It is those nearest and strongest links that provide the 
more important interconnections for the person. 

This is the place of families and communities, where personal gain is sublimated 
to the common good and where economics and materialism come second. It is the 
place where we exist for one another and for the wellbeing of the whole-where we 
gladly forego the luxuries of life for friendship, companionship, and the 
wellbeing of others-the place where we "belong." This is the common meaning of 
"community." 

Communities come in many colors. Often the word is restricted to people living 
in a particular area, and/or people with a common interest-and certainly these 
characteristics help create community solidarity. In  the  age of instant 
worldwide communications the forming of fraternal linking in virtual communities 
is becoming part of our social being. And for ages past humanity's basic need to 
"belong" has been met, in part at least, by nations, religions, and other forms 
of social relations. 

In fact, every person wears a coat of many colors, being a member of various 
communities. For many people even the family is of secondary importance to other 
communal ties, such as the gang, the secret society, or the cult. If the need 
for "belonging" is not met in socially beneficial ways, somewhere, it may break 
out in violence, often deadly, against coworkers, schoolmates, and/or adherence 
to anti-social communities, as the need for community is a universal need. 

New communities are developing with more openness than the extended-family 
communities of the agrarian age and the industrial age which prided themselves 
on closeness and independence of others while rejecting and disparaging values, 
celebrations, lifestyles, and beliefs from outside the group.

Communities are now beginning to reach out in cooperation beyond the limits of 
family, tribe, nation, and religion. Differences in food, dress, ritual, 
lifestyles, and values are found to make life interesting and often lead to 
fads. This is the world for which the learning system must prepare its future 
citizens.
 
The Future of Learning - The Future of Community 

As Horace Mann recognized in 1870, and as modern science confirms today, the 
earliest years in a human's life are the ones in which life patterns are set. 
Crucial to the citizens of the future is the capacity to change and to continue 
lifelong learning. The radically changing society requires citizens who can 
change with the times. Future citizens must be prepared from their earliest 
days, and throughout their lives, to be the creators of continually evolving 
webs of being. 

Some of us have a vision of "Learning Communities" that will replace government 
schools and will know how to change with the times. They will also provide 
learning opportunities for all of their citizens. Libraries, museums, parks, 
farms, factories, businesses, homes, and the streets will be the new milieu for 
learning. Learners will see gaining new skills and knowledge as their central 
purpose for being. Material luxuries will become of secondary importance to 
social and cultural well being. 

There are at least three ways of looking at the term "Learning Communities": (1) 
communities that learn, (2) communities that provide learning opportunities, and 
(3) communities of learners. 

Communities That Learn

First, "Learning Communities" implies communities that are learning and 
continually evolving, a connotation most relevant because all of society is in a 
state of transition. The European-American world was built on what is sometimes 
called the Dominator Paradigm,  based  on  the view that the earth, including 
women, children, animals, plants, and the physical universe, was made for the 
domination and use of man. 

Science has revealed a different cosmos-one that evolves holonistically; that 
is, a world of interlocked and interdependent systems or holons within each 
other that make up a new worldview we call the Gaian Paradigm. It conceives of 
humans as imbedded in turn in family, community, society, and nature. The 
wellbeing of each individual depends on the wellbeing of the larger holons in 
which he is imbedded as well as the small holons that are his parts. Thus the 
wellbeing of each of us is dependent on our evolving community which equally is 
dependent on the learning growth of each of us. 

Communities That Provide Learning Opportunities

Another related connotation for "learning community" is a community that 
provides lifelong learning experiences for all its citizens, each of whom 
participates in the evolution of the community and learns from every aspect of 
the community. 

Libraries, museums, farms, fields, forests, factories, businesses, parks, 
mountains, lakes, and the streets are where we learn. Citizens of all ages are 
provided opportunities to increase their skills and their knowledge. Future 
citizens are not locked away in schools separated from family, community, 
society and nature. They are active parts of the every evolving community and 
participate throughout their lives in the affairs of the community.
 
Communities of Learners 

The third description of Learning Communities,and perhaps the most meaningful, 
is as communities of self-learners.

Modern brain research reveals every input from our senses is sorted and 
harmonized with our existing memory in a single neural network that is 
distributed throughout the brain. This implies that each brain is unique and new 
knowledge cannot be forced into the brains of different individuals at the same 
time in the same way. 

Within this context learning communities provide systems of socialization, not 
merely in terms of companionship and meeting needs for "belonging" but through 
learning about others as well as learning with others. The learning community is 
the foundation on which the larger community and society can be built. 

Conclusion 

We are inescapably communities of learners, but seldom consciously created and 
often ephemeral. In the past decade or so there has been  a rapid increase  in 
grassroots groups  taking charge of their own learning-learning circles, book 
clubs, homeschool support groups, learning libraries, and many other forms of 
collaborative learning. Civil Society is becoming a third leg of governance 
along with the nation state and the corporate network, as grass roots 
organizations (GROs) are solving local problems with local skills and local 
resources. 

With the continuance of these trends, there could be an age in which economic 
and material values are overtaken by the values of humanity, cooperation, and 
mutual aid. The creation of learning communities can be the key to the wellbeing 
of all. 

Meanwhile, the conventional elementary and secondary educational systems, which 
will not immediately disappear, stand in need of serious reform, as also do the 
universities.


9


Summary and Conclusions


Progress or pitfalls?

Beyond the daily disasters in the news there is a huge global crisis. Changes 
are coming faster then ever-some good, but too many bad. Science and invention 
have opened up possibilities hardly dreamed of before-also new dangers. 

On the plus side, technology has made mind-boggling progress to provide cheap 
and rapid communication around the globe, but the Internet has also been used 
for spreading "spam," computer viruses, pornography, and hate messages, and to 
carry terrorists' coded plans. Automation has made it almost unnecessary for 
most people to think, but is that a good thing? Networking also opens up the 
possibility for saboteurs to do catastrophic damage to public utilities and 
systems. And what happens when programming fails and there is no provision for 
human intervention?

Medical science has greatly extended human life spans and new discoveries offer 
relief from many diseases, but rapidly increasing population raises new 
problems. How large a total population can be supported by the natural resources 
of the planet? Agricultural progress has made it possible to produce enough food 
for everyone, although flaws of distribution still result in shortages in some 
places while there are surpluses being destroyed elsewhere. World population has 
grown far beyond what Malthus in the 18th Century thought possible, but there 
must be some limit. Perhaps pollution, traffic congestion, and the stress of 
crowded living  will  reach  the  limit  before  science  runs  out  of  ways  
to provide food. At the same time, recent developments in food production have 
produced harmful effects whose full extent is yet unknown,  especially  with 
regard to chemical adulteration, genetic experimentation, and unsanitary 
conditions in food processing plants. 

More varieties of entertainment are available than ever before, with sounds and 
images reaching everywhere, reflected from satellites as well as travelling on 
fiber-optic cable, in a wide swath of the broadcast spectrum, and by ordinary 
circuits. People, especially the younger generations, are seldom without some 
form of music or talk-nor are they lacking in propaganda and/or advertising 
messages. The quality of entertainment, however, has declined, catering to the 
lowest common denominator, and news has to travel the same channels, often being 
selected and distorted to serve entertainment and commercial purposes. Time for 
quiet thought and meditation has become rare in many environments. 

Countless international bodies exist, many within the United Nations framework, 
with the ostensible purpose of solving world problems, but too often they are 
corrupted by political and commercial considerations. Ancient evils continue 
with potential for harm on a greater scale. War, ethnic clashes, racial hatred, 
corrupt governments, fraud, embezzlement, street crime, police brutality, 
torture, assassinations, wrongful imprisonment, and even slavery continue. Air, 
water, and soil are polluted, forests and wetlands are desecrated, food is 
adulterated, people are exposed to unproven genetically modified crops, and 
workers are endangered on the job-all because of greed for more profit.

The dark side of accelerated technical progress is accelerated peril. Ancient 
disasters could wipe out a civilization. Modern disasters could end the human 
species and maybe all life on this planet. This possibility has hovered over us 
since the invention of the atomic bomb. Now there is also widespread fear of 
biological and chemical weapons. These hazards are spread not only by ill will 
but also because of profits to arms merchants and war financiers.

The struggle for self-government 
  
Democracy holds the best-known hope for safe passage through these times of 
danger. For it to be effective, people must know and understand the events 
around them. As people who have never been allowed to vote before obtain this 
opportunity, they brave great dangers and persevere through inconvenience to 
make their choices at the ballot box. Later generations may take it for granted 
and risk losing control of their own fate through careless indifference.  

Major decisions about the course of world events are often being made without 
the knowledge or consent of the people who will suffer the consequences. The 
people who control the world's largest commercial and financial corporations, 
however, have every opportunity to know about and influence these actions-
whether the decisions are being made in the secret energy policy conferences 
held by U.S. Vice President Cheney with energy company executives, or the secret 
rulings of the World Trade Organization (WTO), or other international bodies 
dominated by financial interests with little or no representation of 
organizations working for the public interest.

The privileged and powerful of the world meet each other in such decision-making 
bodies, as well as in G-8 summits, the exclusive Bilderberg, the Trilateral 
Commission, and the Council on Foreign Relations. Increasingly they live in 
fortified mansions, walled and gated communities, surrounded by armed guards, 
and protected by secret police, even in countries that purport to be democratic. 
They are mostly out of touch with the people whose lives they largely control. 

They tell each other and the public that their globalization policies are for 
the benefit of everyone. The objections raised in this book, and by most of the 
peaceful protesters at international meetings  around  the  world,  are not to 
globalization itself (we are using the global Internet to write this book) but 
to undemocratic, exploitive, and monopolistic methods being used. There is a 
tacit recognition of this in various references to "the current form of 
globalization" in UNCTAD's June 2002 report on the poverty trap 
(www.unctad.org).

Where governments are intended to be answerable to the people, it should be 
possible to correct economic and environmental problems by legislation and 
regulation. Although some 58% of the world's people live in countries that are 
counted as democracies, that leaves 42% with no representative government. Even 
purported democracies are often far from perfect. 

The solution for some people is to form self-sustaining cooperative communities 
with respect for nature and freedom from outside control. As much merit as there 
may be in such life styles, they are not to the taste of everyone and the 
communities must be concerned whether governments and developers will refrain 
from interfering with them. The experience of many indigenous cultures as oil 
and mining companies moved in with collaboration of corrupt governments suggests 
that government cannot just be ignored. 

Likewise, anarchy (essentially meaning to do away with all government) could 
only work among idealistic people who would discipline themselves, which is not 
the state of evolution humanity has achieved yet. Greed and "might makes right" 
are still strong elements of the world we live in.

Since the forces working to seize power and wealth oppose democratic reforms, 
social justice, human rights, and sustainable local economies, citizens must 
never tire of exercising their rights. "Eternal vigilance is the price of 
liberty." There is a constant battle to restrain politicians from accepting 
bribes and special interests from offering them to gain unfair advantages.

The benefits of democracy can only be obtained if all parties, including new 
ones and small start-ups, can compete for voter approval. This requires that 
they be able to get on the ballot and that their message can reach the public. 
Honest counts and fairly drawn voting districts are essential, and there can be 
advantages to preference voting, instant run-offs, proportional representation, 
initiatives, referendums, and the none-of-the-above option.

Political action at the global level becomes necessary because reform efforts 
locally can be thwarted when multinational corporations threaten to move 
business and jobs to another more permissive jurisdiction. This calls for joint 
actions by nations and/or stronger world government. Democratic control must be 
included to prevent global tyranny.

The many territorial disputes of the world threaten peace and freedom. Self-
determination should be the underlying principle, but each conflict raises 
unique problems that make solution difficult and slow. Respect for each other's 
traditions and beliefs is difficult but essential. Arms merchants and their 
political allies have worsened traditional conflicts, and development programs 
that have concentrated people in urban slums have increased frictions. As those 
conditions have become intolerable, desperate people have taken great risks to 
emigrate, creating new problems for the countries where they seek asylum or 
economic opportunity.

Devolution (the return of powers to smaller political units) has been applied in 
Britain and discussed elsewhere. The advantages of bringing decisions home from 
national bureaucracies to manageable local areas always needs to be weighed 
against the advantages of uniformity of law and opportunities over a wider area. 

To build and nourish democratic political institutions, it is suggested that 
people work for social justice and environmental benefits, work against 
monopolistic trends, use demonstrations and legal action against wrongs, vote 
intelligently, engage in community efforts for public services and environmental 
protection, support regulatory protection of the public commons (air, water, 
parkland, etc.), hold polluters financially responsible for adverse 
externalities they cause, reform corporate charters to remove their unfair 
advantages over individuals, and promote more open and responsible forms of 
international  institutions. 

Using corporations to rule the world

Progress in political institutions is difficult because of the undue influence 
of big business and financial interests. Chief executive officers of large 
corporations are either among the ruling elite of the world or else well 
compensated to be their representatives. Compensation of CEOs in the U.S., which 
used to be about 40 times the average for blue-collar workers in 1960, had 
reached a 531-to-1 ratio in 2001. CEOs serve on each other's boards of 
directors, along with bankers, lawyers, accountants, and financial underwriters, 
all voting each other salaries, fees, bonuses, perks, pensions, stock options, 
and other benefits paid by the stockholders.  

When the law requires stockholder approval of board actions, ordinary investors 
who own shares through mutual funds have their stock voted by fund managers 
without consulting them, and almost always in favor of whatever management 
proposes. If stockholders sue for misbehavior of management, the corporate 
officers customarily get their legal expenses paid from company funds.

The corporate scandals that began unfolding early in 2002 involving such large 
corporations as Enron, WorldCom, Global Crossing, Tyco, and Rite Aid, revealed 
that top management, legal advisors, and auditors used accounting tricks to hide 
losses and inflate profits. The perpetrators walked away with millions, while 
ordinary employees and investors were left holding the bag as stock prices 
plummeted.

Among those prominent in obtaining political favors for corporations are the so-
called "defense industries." They are big political campaign contributors, and 
their top officials are in and out of government positions in cabinet 
departments or the military. The governments  then  help  them sell weapons to 
other countries, the leading suppliers being, in order, the United States, 
Russia, France, Germany, Britain, China, and Italy. 

The rulers of big corporations tend to get their way most of the time. On the 
world scene, global corporations (including global bankers  and  financial 
companies) dominate international agencies unrestrained by democratic 
safeguards. The World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the World 
Trade Organization (WTO) override democratic governments. The WTO has forced 
America and Europe to annul various health and environmental laws. Third world 
countries have been required to turn over public services and natural resources 
to private multinational corporations as conditions for international loans. 

The buzz words for these loan conditions include "neo-liberal," "structural 
adjustments," and, ironically, "reform." In fact, these policies involve 
removing government protections of health, safety, workers' rights, and the 
environment. Reports of the World Bank and IMF have even admitted the failure of 
many of their programs that were supposed to benefit less developed countries, 
but so far these organizations have given only lip service to human and 
environmental protection. Similarly, the North American  Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) was supposed to protect workers rights and the environment through "side 
agreements," but no funds were provided. 

Although corporations everywhere fight to escape regulation, European countries 
have retained more protections for workers, consumers, and the environment. In 
May 2002, the European Parliament in Brussels voted for new legislation holding 
companies and their board members responsible for their social and environmental 
performance in Europe and in developing countries. 

In recent years, however, the social-democratic parties in Europe have sought a 
"Third Way" between the welfare state and the free market. Paradoxically, many 
people felt caught between government and corporate bureaucracies and threatened 
by immigration due to oppression and poverty in less prosperous countries-giving 
popular support to nationalistic parties proposing to close borders against 
immigration.

Another unexpected phenomenon of economic changes has been the reduction of time 
people have away from work, with consequences for family and community life. 
When women work outside the home by choice it represents growth of opportunity, 
but many  women  work  for  wages   because  of  economic  necessity.

Many people work more than one job, none of which provide the fringe benefits 
that were associated with employment. Others are unemployed with reduced social 
assistance. In less developed countries widespread unemployment has occurred as 
traditional food sources have been usurped and/or polluted, driving populations 
to seek factory employment in the cities. 

The growth of monopolies and cartels has accelerated as governments increasingly 
abandoned enforcement of antitrust laws and courts sided with the corporations. 
Although mergers are claimed  to  result  in  economies of scale, the benefits 
are often not realized due to bureaucracy in large businesses. In any event, 
business concentration destroys the competition of many suppliers that is 
essential to free markets … la Adam Smith. Large retailers like Wal-Mart can 
drive small retailers out of business with introductory price bargains then, 
when they have monopoly control of the market, put its prices back up.

Corporations have special characteristics that individuals do not have. Under 
U.S. law these include perpetual life, immunity from jail, a legal mandate for 
single-minded profit seeking, lack of size limits, and the power to combine or 
divide themselves as a means of escaping responsibility for actions of 
subsidiaries. 

As the corporate oligarchy has increasingly dominated economic summits and 
international trade meetings, these conferences attended by public officials 
gravitate toward inaccessible sites guarded by armed forces to isolate them from 
any public objections. Peaceful protesters have been brutally treated on the 
pretext of controlling vandalism, when violence was often initiated by police or 
their agents-provocateurs.

Corporate subsidies, endowments, junkets, propaganda and pressures have been 
used to bring universities, research organizations, and judicial agencies to 
their way of thinking. The enormous power of corporations and their friends in 
government has been almost totally ignored in political science academic 
studies. Industrial causes of cancer receive little attention from cancer 
research organizations. Law schools receive strings-attached donations and 
judges are sent to luxury resorts for seminars where they are propagandized by 
advocates of laissez-faire economics.

By playing off one nation or locality against another, large businesses extract 
subsidies, privileges, tax breaks, and freedom from  regulations  concerning 
health, safety, employee rights, or pollution. Some corrupt national leaders 
accept money from corporations to help them drive people off their land into 
homeless city life while the land is poisoned by drilling and mining operations. 
The money usually goes into secret foreign bank accounts, along with proceeds of 
international loans. The corrupt tyrants live very well in exile if and when the 
populace rises up and expels them. 

The economists usually quoted by the media tend to measure economic development 
(and progress) by gross domestic product (GDP), which only counts products and 
services that are sold  for  money. Housework, preparing home meals, bringing up 
children, do-it-yourself projects, and  raising  crops for family consumption 
are all treated as worthless, while transportation to work, hiring childcare, 
and restaurant meals, as well as wages for outside work, are included in GDP. 

These and other statistical errors can make it appear that a nation's economy is 
improving while living conditions of most of the population are actually 
deteriorating. GDP also disregards harmful side effects to public health and the 
environment, and it says nothing about how widely or narrowly the national 
income is distributed.

Among the reasons for environmental harm is ignoring "externalities" such as 
pollution-caused illnesses, poisoning of food sources (such as fish in the 
streams and crops in the land), and hazards to employees. One suggested method 
of correcting this is "true-cost-pricing" where the government would require 
such costs to be included in prices, with proceeds to be use for overcoming the 
harmful effects. 

Seriously harmful "external" costs imposed on people around the world include 
air and water pollution, contamination of food with persistent pesticides, 
fostering of drug-resistant bacteria by  overuse of  antibiotics on healthy 
livestock, recklessly injecting hormones  into  dairy  cows,  and  experimenting  
on  the public by promoting genetically modified foods before determining that 
they are safe. Air pollution has made the natural problems of allergies much 
worse and contributed to the increase of cancer. Dioxin (a byproduct of chlorine 
bleaching of paper) and endosulfan (a pesticide) are well known problems too 
often ignored.

Corporations responsible for such lethal "externalities" attempt to escape 
responsibility by demanding absolute proof that the harmful effects are due to 
their operation rather than other sources, and by trumpeting exaggerated 
estimates of the cost they assert would be passed on to consumers.

To give them their due, in many ways capitalist enterprises use resources 
efficiently. A reformed capitalism that sustains democratic values rather than 
restrains them and includes all the costs to the environment would include 
giving workers a legitimate right to bargain with corporations, breaking up 
powerful trusts, holding corporate officers criminally responsible for corporate 
crimes, and making it illegal for corporations to participate in any political 
process.
The arguments made for private enterprise (often called "free markets" although 
the markets are dominated by monopolies and cartels) usually confuse the issue 
by equating democracy with capitalism. Likewise, mergers are trumpeted as 
beneficial for efficiency and convenience of consumers, when events frequently 
demonstrate the opposite. Big corporations tend to misuse their powers, but 
small and middle-sized companies (and entrepreneurs) give opportunities to 
individuals, producing more innovation, new products, and new jobs than the 
giants. 
Employee ownership of businesses should be encouraged, thus guarding against 
shortsighted policies of absentee ownership, and banks must not be allowed to 
dictate the selection of management. Perhaps the best choice is a "mixed system" 
in which private businesses, producer cooperatives, consumer cooperatives, and 
government agencies all play their part.

Small businesses competing by Adam Smith rules are fine, and if they so please 
their customers that they grow large, so be it. What is wrong is when businesses 
combine to stifle competition and improperly influence government. Corporations 
are NOT persons, and should not be given even more rights than individuals. 
Limited liability without responsibility has caused much of the trouble we see 
today.

The top 200 corporations' combined sales exceed the combined economies of all 
countries except the biggest 10. Between 1983 and 1999, the profits of the Top 
200 firms grew 362.4 percent, while the number of people they employ grew by 
only 14.4 percent. Such a trend cannot be healthy for the global economy.

Communication smothered by media cartel

Business concentration is bad in all industries that should be competitive, but 
it is especially harmful for communications media because it imposes commercial 
censorship that can be as bad as government censorship. In January 2002 The 
Nation published a special issue summarizing the holdings of the "Big Ten" 
members of the media cartel ranging in annual revenues from AT&T's $555 billion 
and General Electric's $130 billion down to Bertelsmann's $17 billion and News 
Corporation's $12 billion. The chart showed many joint ventures and percentage 
shares of ownership involving several of the ten companies.

The Big Ten generally include both the studios that produce content with the 
channels that disseminate it. Entertainment dominates information for these 
companies, who own film studios and libraries, as well as many cinema theater 
chains. The world is split into six regions with DVD discs and players that are 
incompatible with those in other regions. Similarly, the incompatibility of 
television systems (and camcorders) in different parts of the world serves 
commercial interests at the expense of public convenience. Most of these 
companies are also deeply involved in distribution of popular music.

The U.S. Telecommunications Reform Act of 1996, overwhelmingly supported by both 
major parties, effectively removed virtually all limits in the communications 
and entertainment industries. Congress also extended patents and copyrights, 
allowing firms like Disney to profit from artistic work long after the 
originator is dead. 

In the print media category there is also great concentration with most of the 
same players, including AOL/Time-Warner, Bertelsmann, and Rupert Murdoch's News 
Corporation. Control of newspapers and magazines has been merged into huge 
chains, and only a few companies control book publishing and retailing.

The Internet also involves the Big Ten, as well as Microsoft, which has a 
virtual monopoly of computer operating systems and web browsers and has been 
held in violation of the U.S. antitrust laws. As in the case of bio-piracy, 
patent laws have been applied far beyond their original intent, so that not just 
software code but even the method of achieving goals-elementary mathematical 
applications and concepts-have been patented.

The domination of media by big business has stifled information about health 
hazards such as dioxin, bovine growth hormones, nuclear radiation pollution, and 
genetically modified food products. During political campaigns the media 
concentrate on personalities and trivia while excluding non-establishment 
candidates from television debates and generally ignoring substantial political 
issues. (www.projectcensored.org) (www.fair.org)  

Television and the press in the U.S. have almost completely ignored various 
strange and suspicious circumstances described in British and French media 
concerning the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, 
obeying warnings from the White House to "be very careful."

Even school classrooms are not immune from commercialism, with pupils being 
forced to watch a daily half-hour of advertising-saturated programming in 
exchange for electronic equipment donated to the school (while soft drink 
companies are sold exclusive rights to push their sugary products and athletic 
shoe companies dominate sports programs). 

Information media (including newspapers, magazines, books, television, radio, 
digital communication, and cinema) must be freed from censorship by government 
or commercial cartels, the latter being broken up under antitrust laws. Private 
companies should not be able to own and sell monopolies of broadcast spectrum-
these should be periodically auctioned by governments subject to fair operation 
in the public interest or cancellation of the license, and the license should 
not be transferable as property.   

Broadcasters should be required to provide a fair balance of opposing opinions, 
especially during election campaigns, with a reasonable amount of free time to 
each candidate for political discussion and debates. The amount of time devoted 
to advertising and promotions should be subject to reasonable limits and 
"infomercials" should be prohibited. 

If propaganda is published in the form of purported studies or reports from 
"think tanks" there should be accompanying information about the bias of such 
sources, which usually describe themselves as nonpartisan research 
organizations.

The Internet must be kept free of control by government or private  monopolies  
and  available for discussion of alternative points of view. Independent media 
must be able to report on a global basis (www.indymedia.org). Low-power radio 
should be reasonably available for local organizations to provide information 
independent of the mainstream media. Unreasonable copyright and patent 
provisions need to be reversed.

Banking policies enlarge the income gap

Corporations, of course, act according to the wishes of those wealthy persons 
who vote the controlling stock. According to a World Bank study, the top one 
percent in the world's population (about  50  million  of  the  five  billion)   
had  9.5%  of the world's income in 1993, while the whole bottom half had only 
8.5%. According to a UN study, only 1.4% of the world's income in 1992 went to 
the 20% who live in the world's poorest countries.

Wealth is known to be quite concentrated at present, although recent global 
figures are hard to find, especially for wealth rather than income.  Federal 
Reserve figures for 1989 showed that the richest 1% of American households 
accounted for nearly 40% of the nation's wealth, and the top 20% accounted for 
80% of the wealth. The rich, of course, prefer not to disclose such information, 
so the gap may be understated.

With wealth goes power. Powerful banking families have long influenced public 
policy and financed wars. The interests of today's major financial houses and 
corporations are promoted by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World 
Bank (both created at the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944 during World War II), 
and by other agencies for export financing and regional development.

The original purpose of the World Bank was to provide financial aid by making 
and insuring loans where needed to promote economic recovery throughout the 
world. That of the IMF was to maintain fixed and stable exchange rates among the 
currencies of member nations. When currencies were allowed to "float" in the 
1970s, the IMF took on a new mission similar to the World Bank. It offered loans 
(with conditions) to developing countries and guaranteed loans with similar 
conditions by international private banks.

When a currency crisis occurs, the IMF remedy is to demand austerity and 
deregulation in exchange for additional loans or loan extensions. Typically, 
there is no demand for punishment of corrupt politicians, but there are demands 
to give foreign corporations more access to domestic markets, speed up the 
opening  of  branch  offices by foreign banks and stock companies, privatize 
government operations, reduce social welfare programs, and relax protections of 
workers, consumers, and the environment.

Sometimes, when speculators bet against their currency, governments or their 
central banks try to prop up national currencies  at  the  expense  of  the  
public-generally an expensive and futile effort. One proposal to discourage wild 
speculation is the "Tobin tax" of the late Nobel-Prize-winning Yale economist 
James Tobin, promoted by Attac, a 27,000-member organization in France. By 
agreement among nations, financial transactions would be subject to a small tax 
for international aid. Another proposal to stabilize exchange rates would be to 
base currencies on actual commodities rather than existing credit money created 
by banks.

Most, perhaps all, currency throughout the world is now redeemable only for more 
paper, and its purchasing power depends wholly on public confidence. Banks 
create money by simply crediting a customer's account with a balance equal to 
the amount of a loan document signed by the customer. Since the balances in 
customers' bank accounts are not all claimed at once, banks are able to issue 
such credits amounting to many times the bank's capital, the ratio being set by 
bank regulators.

Ostensibly to protect the public against inflation, and to safeguard banks' 
profits, central banks take deflationary measures whenever there is a hint of 
inflation, often resulting in a calamitous rise in unemployment. When financial 
firms "too big to fail" are in trouble, central banks call on the government to 
bail them out with public funds. This encourages risk taking by the banks with 
the consequences at public expense.

In the United States, the Federal Reserve Board (which issues the dollars that 
have become the de facto medium for international exchange) sets interest rates 
independently of any elected officials, as is also the case now with the Bank of 
England and the new European Central Bank.  They all have the same "neo-liberal" 
economic philosophy as the FRB, the World Bank, and the IMF. 

Their "scarce money" policies keep people unemployed because potential customers 
for the goods they would produce lack the money to buy them, and businesses will 
not hire workers if there is no market for the products. In an effort to develop 
markets businesses often try to turn faddish luxuries into necessities, which 
can  lead  to  foolish  waste  of  natural  resources. 

To  facilitate consumerism credit card debt (at exorbitant rates) has been 
promoted so irresponsibly it resembles a house of cards waiting to collapse-and 
banks in the U.S. have successfully lobbied Congress for a law that tends to 
close off any escape from credit card debt through personal bankruptcy filings.

Based on expedients used during the 1930s Depression when economic deadlock 
reached a peak, various arrangements for barter, community currency, and mutual 
credit have come into use. 

One of the best known is Michael Linton's Local Employment Trading System 
(LETS), also known as Local Exchange  Trading  System.  Computer  software  is 
available  that makes it easy for a community to set up such a system 
(www.cyberclass.net). Other community currencies have been developed in Ithaca 
(New York), Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, Chile, and Spain 
(www.cyberclass.net/argentina.htm). Long-term borrowing is also provided by WIR 
in Switzerland (www.wir.ch - in French, German, and Italian) and JAK in Sweden 
(www.jak.se - in English).

In addition to community currencies are proposals for commodity-backed 
currencies for the purpose of resolving inequities in foreign currency 
exchanges, including the Terra, expressed as a specified basket of raw 
materials, proposed by Bernard Lietaer, a former senior executive of the central 
bank of Belgium. Unless non-traditional systems can replace conventional banking 
and fiat money, there still remains the need to reform the national and 
international systems that dominate the world economy. Any international 
organizations such as IMF, the World Bank, and various regional development 
agencies that make grants or loans to assist nations in financial crises should 
not be under the exclusive control of bankers; they should be responsible and 
accountable to elected representatives of the world's people and should not be 
allowed to operate in secret.

The superiority of mind over matter

In dealing with the harmful effects of excessive materialism, people may turn to 
spiritual and philosophical insights. Most people recognize values that go 
beyond personal satisfaction. Although material progress has relieved the 
grinding burdens of many, its excesses can undermine quality of life. There are 
also large numbers of people still struggling for mere existence. To achieve 
global reforms there must be awakened in people the yearning to see purpose in 
life and to help make the world a better place.

Contrary to the assertions of some religious zealots, there are noble motives in 
many nonbelievers. One can find both good and bad in the devout as well as the 
nonbelievers. They can work together for good when they respect each other's 
freedom of thought. It is possible to draw on sources of inspiration from 
various cultures as well as inner resources.

Spirituality aids the progress of human beings, regarding them as more than 
physical bodies, having souls, selves, minds and/or personalities. It aims to 
harmonize the self with infinity, which implies a common bond among all human 
beings. 

Society should make sure that everyone has access to the physical necessities of 
life and to opportunity for spiritual progress. A good example is the best 
teacher. Animals and plants, as well as people, should be treated with love and 
respect.

After thousands of years of the "dominator paradigm," exploiting the environment 
for whatever humans want, earth is in a crisis. Neglect and abuse of the earth's 
ecological systems threatens life on the planet while soaring population places 
increasing demands on earth's resources. Unwise agricultural practices have 
turned much fertile land into desert, and the loss of topsoil makes feeding a 
growing population more difficult.

Millions of individuals around the world have recognized this problem and 
nourished a movement for "sustainable living" based on a greater degree of local 
self-sufficiency based on cooperation rather than competition. Communities 
formed on this basis could conduct lifetime learning and work together in 
regions to form a bottom-up system of international governance.

For any type of self-government literacy and education are important so that 
people can base their decisions on facts that they are able to understand. This 
is especially true when political corruption, media concentration, and 
subsidized propaganda machines are rampant. Unfortunately, these influences also 
infect education at all levels.

Compulsory free education, pioneered in the U.S. in the 19th century and taken 
as a model for universal education in other countries, not only prepared people 
from farms to work in factories but also provided a useful background for 
citizenship. Government support of higher education for U.S. veterans of World 
War II (The GI Bill) was also a documented success.

In recent years, studies have shown declines in academic performance in the 
U.S., along with a rise in youth crime and sexual promiscuity, which some people 
blame on the Supreme Court decision that banned mandatory public prayer in the 
public schools. A more likely explanation lies in unwise educational 
innovations, such as dubious psychological valuations on report cards, stress on 
peer approval, abandonment of phonetic aids to reading, questionable "new" math, 
neglect of geography and history, grade inflation and social promotion, and 
weakening of discipline in school and at home. 

Today's rapidly changing world may call for another revolution in education, 
fostering natural curiosity and joy of learning rather than overemphasis on 
training for jobs. In the more developed nations very few people work on 
assembly lines any more. Neither there nor in the factory towns of less 
developed countries does the traditional pattern prevail of mothers staying home 
to raise children.  

The world has become more complex, with each person becoming a node of a network 
within networks, constantly changing and enabled by electronic communication 
across huge distances. The old idea of schooling that prepared one for a 
lifetime job is obsolete. In advanced societies students must expect career 
changes that will require adaptation. In other places ways of life that  were  
unchanged for generations may become impossible because of manmade or natural 
changes. This makes it vital that education develop versatility and 
adaptability, as well as providing for continuing intellectual growth.

People have an innate need for extended family or community, along with 
pondering the purpose of life-a place where personal material gain is sublimated 
to the common good. If this is not found in the family, it may lead one to the 
gang, secret society, or cult, and when the need for belonging is not met in a 
healthy way it may break out in violence. However, communities are  now 
beginning to reach out in cooperation beyond the limits of family, tribe, 
nation, and religion. A promising development involves Community Learning and 
Information Centers (CLICs). (www.creatinglearningcommunities.org ) 

Learning Communities could replace government schools, adapting to change and 
providing opportunities for all their citizens through the milieu of libraries, 
museums, parks, farms, factories, businesses, homes, and the streets. Learning 
Communities are themselves learning and evolving, they are communities that 
provide learning, and they are communities of self-learners. They can be the 
foundation for the larger society. 

Not all persons learn in the same way, so rote instruction is inefficient. 
Unless and until a new learning system emerges, there is need for serious reform 
in elementary and secondary education, as well as the universities. 

Global reform is a do-it-yourself project

An overall conclusion of this study is that the future of Planet Earth and its 
people is too important to delegate to professional specialists. We cannot just 
leave peace negotiations to the diplomats, war to the generals and admirals, 
monetary policy to the  bankers,  natural  resources  to  the  miners  and  
drillers,   self-government to the politicians, and international commerce to 
secret trade negotiators. Nor can we leave unemployment and poverty problems to 
the economists of financial institutions, communication and information to the 
media oligarchy, food and drug safety to the manufacturers, our spiritual 
convictions to theologians, and learning to educational administrators.

People can make progress on two fronts. They can cooperate to work for more 
responsible behavior by governments, businesses, and organizations that run the 
world. And they can cooperatively  organize  their  own  lives  to  be less 
affected by the negative aspects of modern life. The need is more urgent than 
most people realize.

Modern communications technology can make the task easier. Throughout this book 
we have included links to sources of information and helpful organizations that 
readers can use according to their individual focus of interest. Many additional 
books and Internet links are presented in the next chapter. May you find many 
allies in the struggle for human betterment and solutions to the perils that 
threaten the earth.


10

Finding out the Truth


Given the bias and gaps in news coverage by the mass media, it is not easy to 
keep up with events in the struggle for global justice. To be informed we must 
turn to alternative media, including books that are not necessarily on the best-
sellers list.

The following books and web sites have been recommended by one or more members 
of the FixGov forum as helpful in the context of our discussions. The editors 
are familiar with some of the works and sources cited, but certainly not all of 
them. There is no guarantee, of course, that the content is always consistent 
with the viewpoint of the FixGov forum participants. Readers will form their own 
judgements. 

The lists are rather long and may seem too formidable. We encourage you to look 
through them rather quickly for sources that match your own areas of greatest 
interest. 

BOOKS:

In case a book is incompletely identified below, you may wish to consult 
www.powells.com or www.amazon.com for further information, where you can 
obviously also order the book if you wish.

Ashford, Robert and Rodney Shakespeare [email address: 
Rodney.Shakespeare1@btopenworld.com], Binary Economics - the new Paradigm 
(Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1999) 
Bell, Jim, Achieving Eco-nomic Security On Spaceship Earth (on the Internet at 
http://www.jimbell.com) ["a nuts and bolts,  how to,  common sense book  about 
how to use free-market-forces to revitalize our national and world economies in 
ways that are completely ecologically sustainable."]
Black, Jan Knippers, Inequity in the Global Village, Recycled Rhetoric and 
Disposable People (Kumerian Press)
Blum, William, Rogue State--a Guide to the World's Only Superpower (Monroe, 
Maine: Common Courage Press, 2000)
Bossel, Hartmut, Earth at a Crossroads, Paths to a Sustainable Future, 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998)
Boulding, Kenneth, The Economics of the Coming Spaceship Earth (1971)
Bridges, William, Job Shift, How to Prosper in A Workplace Without Jobs 
(Addison-Wesley Publishing Company)
Bridges, William, Managing Transitions, Making The Most of Change 
Broder, David S., Democracy Derailed: Initiative Campaigns and The Power of 
Money (A James H. Silberman Book,  Harcourt, Inc., 2000)
Brower, Michael, and Warren Leon, The Consumer's Guide to Effective 
Environmental Choices: Practical Advice from the Union of Concerned Scientists 
(Union of Concerned Scientists, 1999)
Brubaker, Sterling, To Live on Earth: Man and His Environment in Perspective 
(The John Hopkins Press, 1972)
Burdick, Eugene, and William J. Lederer, The Ugly American [A classic book about 
how the U.S. approached Vietnam in the 1950s, but could just as well refer to 
American involvement in the Arab world  today.   The  title  has  a  double  
meaning:   The physically ugly American had the kindest heart; the powerful and 
ignorant American officials were "ugly" in their behavior.]
Bunzl, John, The Simultaneous Policy: An Insider's Guide to Saving Humanity and 
the Planet (London: New European Publications, 2001) [The basis of a global 
movement for cooperation among nations to bring multinational corporations and 
finance under control. The author is also the founder of the International 
Simultaneous Policy Organisation, operating in some 20 countries.]
Caldicott, Helen, If You Love This Planet: A Plan To Heal the Earth
Caldwell, Lyton Keith, Environment: A Challenge to Modern Society (Garden City, 
NY: Anchor Books, Double Day & Company, 1971)
Cavanagh, John [see International Forum on Globalization]
Ceballos-Lascurain, Hector, Tourism, Ecotourism and Protected Areas (IV World 
Congress on National Parks and Protected Areas - IUCN Protected Areas Programme) 
Center for Economic and Policy Research, Growth May Be Good for the Poor - But 
are IMF and World Bank Policies Good for Growth?
Center for Public Integrity, Citizen Muckraking: How to Investigate and Right 
Wrongs  in Your Community (Common Courage Press) 
Chossudovsky, Michel, The Globalization Of Poverty - Impacts of IMF and World 
Bank Reforms (Penang, Malaysia: The Third World Network, 1997)
Covey, Stephen, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People - Powerful Lessons 
in Personal Change (Simon & Schuster)
Covey, Stephen, Principle-Centered Leadership (Simon & Schuster)
Cummins, Ronnie and Ben Lilliston, Genetically Engineered Foods: A Self-Defense 
Guide for Consumers (Marlowe & Company)
Daily, Gretchen C. and Paul R. Ehrlich, Population, Sustainability, and Earth's 
Carrying Capacity: A framework for estimating population sizes and lifestyles 
that could be sustained without undermining future generations (BioScience, 
1992)
DeVilliers, Marq, Water - The Fate of Our Most Precious Resource 
Diamond, Jared, Guns, Germs, and Steel, (London: W.W. Norton, 1997)
Douthwaite, Richard, The Growth Illusion (Lilliput Press, Dublin, 1992)
Drucker, Peter F., Managing for The Future 
Eisler, Riene, The Chalice and the Blade [re the "Dominator Paradigm"]
Elgin, Duane, and Coleen LeDrew, Global Paradigm Report: Tracking the Shift 
Underway
Eyerman, Ron, and Andrew Jamison, Social Movements: A Cognitive Approach 
(University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1991)
Peter Farb, Peter, Man's Rise to Civilization (New York: EP Dutton, 1968)
"Foreign Affairs," a journal published quarterly by the Council on Foreign 
Relations, New York
Fresia, Jerry, Toward an American Revolution - Exposing the Constitution & other 
Illusions (Boston: South End Press, 1988)
Fuller, Buckminster, Critical Path
Gelspan, Ross, The Heat Is On: The Climate Crisis, The Cover-Up, The 
Prescription (Perseus Books,1998)
Gore, Albert, Earth in the Balance (1992) [Written by the former U.S. vice 
president and 2000 presidential candidate.] 
Greco, Thomas H., Money. Understanding and Creating Alternatives to Legal 
Tender, (Chelsea Green, 2002) [A major critique of fiat money controlled by 
private bankers.]
Greider, William, Who Will Tell the People, the Betrayal of American Democracy 
(New York: Touchstone - Simon & Schuster, 1993)
Greider, William, One World Ready or Not, the Manic Logic of Global Capitalism, 
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997)
Goldsmith, James, The Response (London: Macmillan, 1995)
Hawken, Paul, The Ecology of Commerce, A Declaration of Sustainability 
Hawken, Paul, Amory Lovins and L. Hunter Lovins, Natural Capitalism: Creating 
the Next Industrial Revolution (Little, Brown & Company)
Heilbronner, Robert, Twenty-first Century Capitalism (1992)
Henderson, Hazel, Beyond Globalization: Shaping a Sustainable Global Economy
Henderson, Hazel, Building a Win-Win World (Kumarian Press)
Hertz, Noreena, The Silent Takeover
Honey, Martha, Ecotourism & Sustainable Development - Who Owns Paradise? (Island 
Press)
Huntington, Samuel P., The Clash Of Civilizations and the Remaking of World 
Order (London: Simon and Schuster, 1997)
International Forum on Globalization, Alternatives to Economic Globalization: A 
Better World Is Possible (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2002)
Isaak, Robert, Green Logic, Ecopreneurship, Theory & Ethics (Kumerian Press)
Judis, John B., The Paradox of American Democracy, Elites, Special Interests, 
and the Betrayal of Public Trust
Kelso, Louis O. and Mortimer J. Adler, The Capitalist Manifesto (New York: 
Random House, 1958)
Kelso, Louis O. and Mortimer J. Adler, The New Capitalists: A Proposal for 
Freeing Growth from the Slavery of Savings (New York: Random House, 1961) [Kelso 
and Adler books, and other Kelso writings, are accessible free from the web site 
of the Kelso Institute for the Study of Economic Systems at 
http://www.kelsoinstitute.org]
Kohr, Leopold, The Breakdown of Nations (London: New European Publications, 
2001)
Korten, David C., The Post Corporate World-Life After Capitalism (West Hartford, 
Connecticut: Kumerian Press, 1999)
Korten, David C., When Corporations Rule the World (West  Hartford, Connecticut: 
Kumerian Press, 1995) [Detailed examples of third world disasters and admitted 
failures of the World Bank and IMF.]
Lapp‚, Frances Moore, Joseph Collins, and Peter Rosset, World Hunger, Twelve 
Myths (Grove Press, New York, 1986)
Lietaer, Bernard, The Future of Money: a new way to create wealth, work and a 
wiser world (Century/Random House, 2001) [Former high official of the central 
bank in Belgium.] 
Logan, Ron, PROUT: A New Approach to Socio-Economic Development
Lundberg, Ferdinand, The Rich and the Super Rich: A Study in the Power of Money 
Today, (New York: Lyle Stuart, 1968)
Mander, Jerry, and Edward Goldsmith (eds.), The Case Against the Global Economy 
and for a Turn Toward The Local (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1996)
Manning, Richard, Grasslands (concerning agricultural problems)
Martin, Hans-Peter, and Harald Schumann, The Global Trap: Globalization and the 
Assault on Democracy and Prosperity (St. Martin's Press, New York, 1997)
McChesney, Robert, Rich Media, Poor Democracy (University of Illinois 
Press,1999) [further information can be found at www.robertmcchesney.com].
McCloskey, David, Ecology and Community: The Bioregional Vision
McLaren, Deborah, Rethinking Tourism and Ecotravel, The Paving of Paradise and 
What You Can Do To Stop It (Kumerian Press) 
Moore, Richard K., Escaping the Matrix 
Muir, Diana, Reflections in Bullough's Pond: Economy and Ecosystem 
Ohmae, Kenichi, End of The Nation State - The Rise of Regional Economies, How 
new engines of prosperity are reshaping global markets
O'Shah, Nasrudin, The Zen of Global Transformation, (Wexford Ireland: Quay Largo 
Productions, 2002) (http://www.QuayLargo.com/Transformation/)
Parenti, Michael, The Sword and the Dollar, Imperialism, Revolution, and the 
Arms Race (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1989)
Parenti, Michael, History as Mystery (San Francisco, City Lights Books, 1999)
Parenti, Michael, Make-Believe Media - The Politics of Entertainment (New York: 
St. Martin's Press, 1992) 
Parenti, Michael, Inventing Reality - The Politics of News Media (New York: St. 
Martin's Press, 1993)
Peters, Tom, Thriving on Chaos - Handbook for a Management Revolution 
Phillips, Kevin, Arrogant Capital (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1994) 
[Major changes in the U.S. political system to restore citizen control of 
government proposed by a Republican political analyst of Nixon's 1988 campaign 
who has since criticized Reagan's tax cuts for the rich and corporations.]
Quinn, Daniel, The Story of B (London: Bantam Books, 1996)
Rawls, John, Law of Peoples (1999)
Rawls, John, Political Liberalism (1993)
Rawls, John, A Theory of Justice (1971)
Ray and Anderson, The Cultural Creatives 
Rifkin, Jeremy, Beyond Beef
Rifkin, Jeremy, The End of Work - Technology, Jobs and Your Future
Rifkin, Jeremy, The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post-
Market Era  (G. P. Putnam & Sons)
Rifkin, Jeremy, Beyond Beef, The Rise & Fall of the Cattle Culture (Penguin 
Books)
Robbins, John, Diet for A New America, How Your Food Choices Affect Your Health, 
Happiness and Future of Life On Earth (Stillpoint Publishing) 
Robbins, John, Diet for A New World
Robbins, John, Food Revolution 
Rough, Jim, Society's Breakthrough!: Releasing Essential Wisdom and Virtue in 
All the People, (Bloomington, Indiana: 1stPublishing, 2002)
Ruckelshaus, William, "Toward a Sustainable World" (Scientific American, Sept. 
1989)
Sandoz, Maria, Crazy Horse: Strange Man of the Oglalas (50th Anniversary 
Edition, University of Nebraska Press, 1992)
Schipper, Lee, Ruth Steiner, and Stephen Meyers, "Trends in Transportation 
Energy Use, 1970 - 1988: An International Perspective", in Transportation And 
Global Climate Change, edited by David L. Green and Danilo J. Santini, published 
by the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, Washington, D.C., and 
Berkeley, California, 1993
Schumacher, E. F., Small is Beautiful (1973). 
Shapiro, Howard-Yana, and John Harrisson, Gardening for the Future of the Earth
Sklar, Holly (ed.), Trilateralism - the Trilateral Commission and Elite Planning 
for World Management (South End Press, Boston, 1980)
Simon, D. and A. Naaman (eds.) Development as Theory and Practice (Harlow: 
Addison Wesley Longman & DARG, RGS-IBG, 2000)
Simon, Joel, Endangered Mexico: An Environment on The Edge (Sierra Club Books)
Simone, Charles B., Cancer and Nutrition 
Sitarz, Daniel, AGENDA 21- The Earth Summit Strategy to Save Our Planet
Sobel, Robert, The Great Boom, How a Generation of Americans Created the World's 
Most Prosperous Society
Soros, George, Open Society, Reforming Global Capitalism [By the currency 
speculator who made a fortune on the collapse of the British pound sterling but 
has since advocated global reform.]
Steen, Athena, Bill Steen, David Bainbridge, and David Eisenberg The Straw Bale 
Housebook (A Real Goods Independent Living Book)
Stimson, Richard A., Playing with the Numbers, How So-called Experts Mislead us 
about the Economy (Westchester Press, 1999) [Facts are presented to expose the 
misinformation spread by official sources about the U.S. and world economy. 
http://www.stimson.homestead.com for excerpts from book, reviews, etc.]
Thoren, Theodore R., and Richard Warner, The Truth in Money Book 
(ISBN:0960693874; 4th rev edition, April 1994) [It gives a scientific analysis 
of the federal reserve monetary system, including how banks legally create money 
and how the system is designed so there is more debt than money to pay it back-
James McGuigan]. 
Toffler, Alvin, The Third Wave (1980) [Futurist author whose best sellers also 
include Future Shock.]
Vanderbilt, Tom, The Sneaker Book - Anatomy of An Industry, Bottom Line 
Marketing & Advertising (The New Press)
Vidal, Gore, Perpetual War for Perpetual Peace: How We Got To Be So Hated (2002)
Wallach, Lori and Michelle Sforza, Whose Trade Organization? (Public Citizen)
Wasserman, Harvey, The Last Energy War: The Battle over Utility Deregulation 
(Seven Stories Press)
Weisman, Alan, Gaviotas, A Village to Reinvent the World (Chelsea Green 
Publishing Company)  
Wolman, William, and Anne Colamosca, The Judas Economy: The Triumph of Capital 
and the Betrayal of Work (Addison-Wesley, 1997)
Zinn, Howard, A People's History of the United States (New York: Harper Collins, 
1989)

WEB SITES:

The following web addresses have each been recommended by at least one member of 
the FixGov forum. Explanatory descriptions have been included in most cases, 
often as supplied by the sites themselves, which are therefore responsible for 
the accuracy of the description. The authors and editors do not necessarily 
agree with statements and opinions on these sites. For convenience the listings 
have been arranged in categories generally following the chapters, although some 
overlapping occurs. For example, some sites that could be listed as Global and 
National Action appear instead under the topics to which they relate.

The editors regret if any sites may turn out not to be accessible by the time 
you try them.

Globalization Problems

Agenda 21 & Other UNCED Agreements 
http://www.igc.org/habitat/agenda21/

Bilderberg 
http://www.bilderberg.org/
The High Priests of Globalization

Buckminster Fuller Institute 
http://www.bfi.org/
Economic and political analysis by the genius inventor of the geodesic dome.	

Bretton Woods Project 
http://www.brettonwoodsproject.org/
Critical Voices on the IMF and World Bank.	

CIA. Global Trends 2015
http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html
A Dialogue about the Future with Nongovernmental Experts.

Covert Action 
http://www.covertaction.org/
	Keeps you up-to-date on covert activities, cover-ups, military affairs, 
and current trouble spots. Contributors include many ex-intelligence officers 
who saw the error of their ways.

Earth Charter 
http://www.earthcharter.org/
	"We must join together to bring forth a sustainable global society founded 
on respect for nature, universal human rights, economic justice, and a culture 
of peace. Towards this end, it is imperative that we, the peoples of Earth, 
declare our responsibility to one another, to the greater community of life, and 
to future generations."

Global Exchange 
http://www.globalexchange.org/
	"Global Exchange is a human rights organization dedicated to promoting 
environmental, political, and social justice around the world. Since our 
founding in 1988, we have been striving to increase global awareness among the 
US public while building international partnerships around the world."
http://www.globalexchange.org/economy/
http://www.globalexchange.org/wbimf/links.html
	World Bank / IMF Links.

Global Issues that affect everyone
http://www.globalissues.org/
	Maintained by Anup Shah in his spare time and at his own expense. All 
information presented is well documented with links to sources.

Global Village or Global Pillage? 	
http://www.villageorpillage.org

Growth May Be Good for the Poor-But are IMF and World Bank Policies Good for 
Growth? 
http://www.cepr.net/response_to_dollar_kraay.htm
A Closer Look at the World Bank's Most Recent Defense of Its Policies.

International Forum on Gloalization (IFG) 
http://www.ifg.org/
The IFG first met in 1994 in the wake of NAFTA and the Uruguay Round of GATT, 
recognizing that global governance was being taken over by transnational 
corporations and their international trade bureaucracies. Begun as a think tank 
among some thirty people (later expanded to over sixty), the IFG favors new 
international agreements that place the needs of people, local economies, and 
the natural world ahead of the interest of corporations.

Multinational Monitor's on-line database 
http://www.essential.org/monitor/monitor.html 
World Bank, IMF, environmental and labor issues, searchable back issues, and 
links to other sources on corporate and international issues. 

Open Democracy 
http://www.opendemocracy.net
Forum on Globalisation.

Poverty in Africa -- World Bank 
http://www4.worldbank.org/afr/poverty/default.htm

Secession Network 
http://secession.net/
"At least 5,000 ethnic, linguistic and racial groups are lumped together into 
only 189 nation states.  Most of the world's violent conflicts are related to 
struggles for dominance within or independence from some large, multi-national 
nation state.  A large portion of the world's people would choose to secede from 
their respective nation states if given the opportunity."

United Nations - Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
http://www.un.org/rights/50/decla.htm

World Watch Institute 
http://www.worldwatch.org/


Environmental Issues

Audubon Society Online 
http://www.audubon.org/
	
Bullfrog Films 
http://www.bullfrogfilms.com/
	Environmental and Educational Videos.

Capitol Report - Environmental News Links 
http://www.caprep.com/

Centre for Science and Environment 
http://www.cseindia.org/index.html

Climate Neutral Travelling
http://www.triplee.com/

Climate Solutions - Publications 
http://climatesolutions.org/global_warming_is_here/index.html
	
Columbia University Studies
http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/indicators/ESI/ESI_01a.pdf
	2001 Environmental Sustainability Index.
http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/indicators/ESI/ESI_01b.pdf
	Country Profiles.

Earth Emergency 
www.earthemergency.org
"A Call to Action is bringing together non governmental organisations and 
activists and local and global networks around an agreed agenda, based on a 
planetary ethic of respect for all life  and human dignity and to urge 
governments worldwide to join us in using the coming decade to adopt the new 
thinking and actions required to restore the earth and secure a sustainable 
future for present and coming generations."

Earth First Journal
 http://www.earthfirstjournal.org/
Radical Environmental Journal

Earth from Space - Earth Observatory
http://earth.jsc.nasa.gov/

Earth Science Image Gallery 
http://www.earth.nasa.gov/gallery/index.html

Eco-Standards for Multinationals
http://ens.lycos.com/ens/sep2000/2000L-09-01-01.html
	Multinationals with High Eco-Standards Most Likely to Succeed.

Environment.org (UK)
http://www.environment.org.uk/activist/
	
Federation of American Scientists 
http://www.fas.org/
	
Friends of the Earth 
http://www.foe.org
	Opposes genetically engineered food, and has sued to force cost-benefit 
analysis of the US Forest Service's logging program. 

Genetically Engineered Food
http://www.greenpeaceusa.org/ge
	"Green Peace website fighting genetically engineered food in Kellogg's 
cereal and other products.  Kellogg promises not to use genetically modified 
organisms (GMOs) in their cereal sold in Europe, but refuses that promise to 
Americans."

Green Innovations (Australia)
http://www.green-innovations.asn.au/

Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy 
http://www.iatp.org/
IATP	promotes resilient family farms, rural communities and ecosystems around 
the world through research and education, science and technology, and advocacy.

Lindzen on ClimateChange 
http://www.cato.org/pubs/regulation/reg15n2g.html
	Global Warming: The Origin and Nature of the Alleged Scientific Consensus, 
Richard S. Lindzen, the Alfred P. Sloan Professor of Meteorology at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (Opponent of the global warming 
theories.)

Oil Resources
http://www.hubbertpeak.com/index.asp
	Named after the late Dr. M. King Hubbert, geophysicist, this website 
provides data, analysis and recommendations regarding the upcoming peak in the 
rate of global oil extraction.

Planet Drum
http://www.planetdrum.org/
"Developed the concept of a bioregion: a distinct area with coherent and 
interconnected plant and animal communities, and natural systems, often defined 
by a watershed."

Public Interest Research Groups
http://www.pirg.org/enviro/superfund
Grassroot campaign to make polluters, not taxpayers, pay for clean up of toxic 
waste sites

Rainforest Action Network 
http://www.ran.org/

Resource Center on Business, the Environment and the Bottom Line 
http://www.greenbiz.com

Sierra Club (USA)
http://www.sierraclub.org/
"Protecting the Environment... For Our Families, For Our Future."

United Nations System-wide Earth Watch
http://www.earthwatch.unep.net
Earthwatch is a United Nations initiative to coordinate and share UN-wide 
information on the global environment

World Scientists' Warning To Humanity 
http://www.deoxy.org/sciwarn.htm

Economic and Financial Topics

Achieving Eco-nomic Security on Spaceship Earth
http://www.jimbell.com
A nuts and bolts, how to, common sense book about how to use free-market-forces 
to revitalize our national and world economies in ways that are completely 
ecologically sustainable. Jim Bell is an independent broadcaster in California.  
His radio show at 10-11 p.m. Sundays can be heard on the Internet.

Campaign for America's Future
http://www.ourfuture.org
For a budget that meets social needs rather than favoring the rich and the war 
machine

Chossudovsky on Global Finance and Poverty
http://www.transnational.org/features/g7solution.html
	The G7 "Solution" to the Global Financial Crisis - A Marshall Plan for 
Creditors and Speculators by Michel Chossudovsky.
http://www.transnational.org/features/chossu_worldbank.html
	Global Falsehoods: How the World Bank and the UNDP Distort the Figures on 
Global  Poverty. By Michel Chossudovsky.

Economic Policy Institute
http://www.epinet.org
Provides information and links to various organizations.

Economic Policy News 
http://www.epn.org/ideacentral/economic.html
	Home page provides links to numerous non-governmental  organizations 
(NGOs).

Galbraith on Economic Fallacies
http://www.prospect.org/archives/V11-7/galbraith-j.html
	"How the Economists Got It Wrong."

New Economics Foundation
http://www.neweconomics.org/
 
Progressive Utilization Theory (PROUT)
http://www.prout.org/index.html
"Economics for Human Development."

Redefining Progress 
http://www.rprogress.org/index.html
Favors the "Genuine Progress Indicator" over misleading GDP figures.

The True Majority
http://www.truemajority.org 
Against squandering wealth on war


Political Systems 

The Ballot Box 
http://www.ballot-box.org/
	"The Deception of a Democracy."

Black Radical Congress 
http://www.blackradicalcongress.org/
	"Forging a Black Liberation Agenda for the 21st Century."

Capitol Strategy 
http://www.capitolstrategy.com/
	Washington's Political Portal.

Center for Public Integrity 
integrityhttp://www.publicintegrity.org/
"to provide the American public with the findings of its investigations and 
analyses of public service, government accountability, and ethics-related issues 
via books, reports and newsletters."

CounterCoup 
http://www.geocities.com/countercoup/
No vote count, No victory! No justice, No peace!

Gore Won Site 
http://www.geocities.com/dearkandb/

League of Women Voters (USA)
http://www.lwv.org/
	LWV, "a nonpartisan political organization, encourages the informed and 
active participation of citizens in government, works to increase understanding 
of major public policy issues, and influences public policy through education 
and advocacy."

Public Campaign
http://www.publiccampaign.org
Working against campaign finance abuse

Nazis and the Republican Party 
http://www.bartcop.com/nazigop.htm

Thomas Paine
http://tompaine.com/
	Inspired by the radical writer of the American Revolution, Thomas Paine. 


Corporate Power

Corporation history
http://www.corporatewatch.org/pages/dan_corp.html
"The creation & development of English commercial corporations and the abolition 
of democratic control over their behaviour." 

Corporate Watch
http://www.corporatewatch.org/

Multinational Monitor 
http://www.essential.org/monitor/
Founded by Ralph Nader. September 2001 issue features "Bearing the Burden of IMF 
and World Bank Policies."

POCLAD 
http://www.poclad.org/
	Programs on Corporations, Law and Democracy.

Top 100 Corporate Criminals of the Decade 
http://www.corporatepredators.org/top100.html

World Economic Forum
http://www.weforum.org/
Incorporated since 1971 as a foundation, it has become an institution comprised 
of the 1,000 most powerful corporations in the world. In 2002 it moved its 
annual meeting from from its traditional setting in Davos, Switzerland to New 
York in an act of solidarity with the city.



Monetary Systems

Cyberclass Network 
http://www.cyberclass.net/
Emphasis on community currencies vs. fiat money.	

Cyberclass - LETS
http://www.cyberclass.net/bartable.htm
	LETS. Local Employment Trading System. Usury-free Community Currency.
http://www.cyberclass.net/turmel/urlsnat.htm
	700 LETS timetrading systems in 45 different countries.

Commodity Currencies 
http://www.geog.le.ac.uk/ijccr/5no1.htm
"Commodity Currencies for Fair and Stable International Exchange Rates." By 
Walter Plinge.

Community Exchange Systems in Asia, Africa and Latin America 
http://ccdev.lets.net/index2.html

Davies on Monetary History
http://www.ex.ac.uk/~RDavies/arian/llyfr.html
History of Money from Ancient Times to the Present Day by Glyn Davies
	
Debt Slavery
http://www.cfoss.com/grip.html
	The Grip of Death: a study of modern money, debt slavery and destructive 
economics by Michael Rowbotham

Future of Money
http://www.cato.org/pubs/books/money/tableof.htm
The future of money in the information age. Ed. by James A. Dorn 

Greco on Community Currencies
http://www.ic.org/market/money/index.html
New Money for Healthy Communities by Thomas H. Greco, Jr.

International Journal of Community Currency Research 
http://www.geog.le.ac.uk/ijccr/
	"The aim of this journal is to provide a forum for the dissemination of 
knowledge and understanding about the emerging array of community currencies 
being used throughout the world both at present and in the past."

Islamic Banking 
http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/economics/islamic_banking.html
	Islamic banking. By Mohamed Ariff, University of Malaya.
http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/economics/nbank1.html
	Principles of Islamic Banking.

Lietaer on Community Currencies
http://www.ratical.org/many_worlds/cc/CC.html
 	Community Currencies. By Bernard Lietaer.

Menger on the origins of money
http://www.ecn.bris.ac.uk/het/menger/money.txt
	The origins of money.  Carl Menger.

Mondragon Coop 
http://www.mondragon.mcc.es/ingles/menu_ing.html
	Successful Cooperative in Spain.

Monetary Reform
http://www.electronz.cjb.net/
	Electronz. The New Zealand monetary reform weekly e-zine (edited by Don 
Bethune, QSM)

No Usury Net 
http://www.nousury.net/
	Ed. by T.J. Kennedy.

Reinventing Money 
http://www.communitycurrency.org/reweaveWeb.html
	Reinventing Money, Restoring the Earth, Reweaving the Web of Life. By 
Carol Brouillet.

Shann Turnbull of Australia on money and banking
http://members.optusnet.com.au/~sturnbull>


Communications Media 

Cronkite on the Media 
http://www.mediachannel.org/originals/cronkite.shtml
	Famous American TV newsman Walter Cronkite's comments on the media. 

FAIR
www.fair.org 
An organization dedicated to "Fairness & Accuracy in Reporting" (FAIR), that has 
email notices and a website to expose incomplete and/or inaccurate information 
in the media.

McChesney on the Media
http://www.robertmcchesney.com	
Criticism of the media by a communications professor at the University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
 
Media Watchers and Activists 
http://www.uiowa.edu/~commstud/resources/media/mediawatch.html 
	Civil organisations that participate in Media Watch: a model for civic 
action. 

PR Watch 
http://www.prwatch.org/ 
	Exposing the activities of secretive, little-known propaganda-for-hire 
firms that work to control political debates and public opinion. 

UN World Summit on the Information Society. 
http://www.itu.int/wsis/ 
	What values do we embrace to ensure that the Information Society becomes a 
vehicle for democracy, justice, equality, the respect for individuals and 
peoples, their personal and social development?


Alternative News

American Partisan (Internet magazine)
http://www.americanpartisan.com/
	"Hard Hitting Commentary and Informative News."

American Prospect, The  (USA)
http://www.prospect.org/
 A Magazine of Politics, Policy and Culture.

Arianna on Line
http://www.ariannaonline.com/
	Arianna Huffington is a nationally syndicated columnist and author of 
eight books. She conducted a "shadow convention" to expose hypocrisy in U.S. 
major party conventions. In her book, How To Overthrow the Government, she 
"describes how America has been torn in two-divided between a moneyed elite 
getting rich from globalization and an increasing number of citizens left 
choking on the dust of Wall Street's galloping bulls." 

Blue Ear Forum 
http://www.blueear.com/
	"Global Writing Worth Reading." Journalists and authors from many 
countries write on observations, comment, books, travel, etc.

Deep Dish TV
http://www.deepdishtv.org
"A national satellite network, linking local access producers and programmers, 
independent video makers, activists, and other individuals who support the idea 
and reality of a progressive television network."

Environmental Media Services 
http://www.ems.org/

Environment News Service 
http://ens.lycos.com/aboutens.html
	
Harry Timez Link Page 
http://www.sboa.se/harry/harryharry.html
	Maintained by a Swedish journalist, in English. Brief excerpts and links 
to current news and comment in major publications. 

Indymedia - independent media reports
http://www.indymedia.org
Eyewitness reports from protest meetings against WTO, IMF and World Bank abuses, 
such as at Seattle, at the Republican and Democratic conventions, and at Quebec, 
Genoa, Washington, etc. 

Mother Jones Magazine - The MoJo Wire
http://www.motherjones.com/
	"Daily News and Resources for the Sceptical Citizen."

Paper Tiger Television (PTTV)
http://www.papertiger.org
"An open, non-profit, volunteer video collective. Through the production and 
distribution of our public access series, media literacy/video production 
workshops, community screenings and grassroots advocacy PTTV works to challenge 
and expose the corporate control of mainstream media."

Project Censored at Sonoma State University in California
http://www.projectcensored.org
	Weekly release of important news under-covered by mainstream press.
http://www.sonoma.edu/projectcensored/
Annual lists of the most neglected and the most over-covered news stories in the 
mainstream media.

Prospect Magazine (UK)
http://www.prospect-magazine.co.uk/
	"Prospect is the magazine for the intellectually curious general reader 
who appreciates finely written essays across the spectrum of political, 
intellectual and cultural debate. It is the intelligent monthly based in 
Britain-but with an international mind and an international readership."

World Daily Net 
http://www.worldnetdaily.com/
	"A Free Press For A Free People."

Znet and Zmag
http://www.zmag.org/
"A Community of People Concerned about Social Change." This is a major 
electronic magazine featuring many comments and interviews including ones with 
Noam Chomsky.


Alternative Life Styles

Alternet on Cultural Creatives
http://www.alternet.org/creatives.html
	50 Million Creatives?

Alternatives for Simple Living 
http://www.simpleliving.org/
	
Bicycling Community Page 
http://danenet.wicip.org/bcp/
	
Canelo Project Mexico 
http://www.caneloproject.com/
	Straw bale and cob construction.

Co-Intelligence Institute 
http://www.co-intelligence.org/
	"Co-intelligence is living well WITH each other and life, creatively using 
diversity and uniqueness, consciously evolving together in partnership with 
nature, transforming culture. Use it for organizational development, better 
family relations, community renewal, and creating a more just, democratic and 
sustainable society."

Development Center for Appropriate Technology
http://www.cyberbites.com/dcat/
"DCAT fosters creative solutions for meeting current basic human needs in ways 
that preserve positive options for future generations."

Information Centre for Low-tech Sustainability 
http://www.bagelhole.org/
	
Korten on Civil Society 
http://cyberjournal.org/cj/authors/korten/CivilizingSociety.shtml
David Korten on Civil Society. An Unfolding Cultural Struggle.

Straw Bale Building Technology 
http://strawbale.archinet.com.au/
	
Sustainable Development UK 
http://www.sustainable-development.gov.uk/

Sustainable Economics 
http://www.sus-tec.freeserve.co.uk/
	The bimonthly newsletter of the Green Economy Working Group of the Green 
Party of England and Wales.

Turtle Island Earth Stewards 
http://www.ties.bc.ca/


Education

Coalition for Self-Learning (CLC)
http://www.creatinglearningcommunities.org/

Northwest Earth Institute 
http://www.nwei.org/
"NWEI is a pioneer in taking earth-centered education programs to people where 
they spend their time-in their neighborhoods, workplaces, homes, schools, and 
centers of faith."

Plug into the Sun (UK)
http://www.pluggingintothesun.org.uk/
Educational Resources and Workshops in Energy Efficiency, Renewable Energy and 
Sustainable Development

Transforming Human Culture
http://www.earley.org/Transformation/transforming_human_culture.htm
Transforming Human Culture: Social Evolution and the Planetary Crisis by Jay 
Earley

Turtle Island Institute
 http://www.tii-kokopellispirit.org
Kokopelli Spirit Ezine, Resource Guides, Communities, and Social Transformation 
(under construction)


Global and National Action

Aligning With Purpose...for a Better World
http://www.aligningwithpurpose.com/
Jay Fenello's site: "Committed to peaceful, evolutionary change for the better. 
Here you will find assorted discussions and theories about what's wrong with our 
world, and what we can do about it.  You will also find links to other sites 
consistent with our world view."

Alliance for Global Justice - 50 Years is Enough Network 
http://www.50years.org
Opposing policies of World Bank and IMF.

Common Cause 
http://www.commoncause.org
	Founded by Ralph Nader, "a non partisan citizen's group working for 
openness, honesty and accountability in government."

Congress Watchdog
http://www.congresswatchdog.org
	Public Citizen's site for voting records.

Focus on the global South 
http://www.focusweb.org/
	
Foundation for Enterprise Development 
http://www.fed.org/
	A non-profit organization dedicated to helping entrepreneurs and 
executives use employee ownership and equity compensation as a fair and 
effective means of motivating the workforce and improving corporate performance.

Mobilization for Global Justice
http://www.a16.org
	A key organization for the protest marches and demonstrations against 
policies of the World Bank and IMF. Site includes reports of past 
demonstrations.

Moore on Changing the World 
http://cyberjournal.org/cj/guide/
How the world works and how we can change it by Richard Moore

People-Centered Development Forum (PCDForum)
http://iisd1.iisd.ca/pcdf/
	Founded by David Korten, "an international alliance of individuals and 
organizations dedicated to the creation of just, inclusive, and sustainable 
human societies through voluntary citizen action."

Physicians for Social Responsibility (US affiliate of International Physicians 
for the Prevention of Nuclear War) 
http://www.psr.org
PSR opposes hazardous transport and use of plutonium for nuclear energy plants 
around the world.

Protest.net 
http://www.protest.net/
	A Calendar of Protest, Meetings and Conferences.

Public Citizen 
http://www.citizen.org/
	Founded by Ralph Nader to reform American politics.

Simultaneous Policy
http://www.simpol.org/
The International Simultaneous Policy Organisation (ISPO), building support for 
commitments by all nations to restrain destructive competition and promote 
global justice. Information on the book, The Simultaneous Policy: An Insider's 
Guide to Saving Humanity and the Planet, by  John Bunzl.

Transnational Resource & Action Center 
http://www.corpwatch.org/trac/about/trac.html 
"Counters corporate-led globalization through education and activism."

Union of Concerned Scientists 
http://www.ucsusa.org/ucs-home.html	

United Nations Reform
http://www.cunr.org
	Campaign for U.N. Reform offers a questionnaire to pin down your 
candidates on foreign policy questions

United Nations - Sustainable Development - Agenda 21
http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/agenda21.htm

Vote Smart
http://www.vote-smart.org
	Project Vote Smart provides factual information on candidates' positions, 
voting records, backgrounds, and campaign financing.

World Federalist Association 
http://www.wfa.org
	WFA works for more effective world government.

World Future Council
www.worldfuturecouncil.org
"There is widespread global agreement on key values and action priorities. A 
council of respected individuals will be drawn from the wise, the heroes, the 
pioneers and the young. The moral power of this voice of global stewardship 
should not be underestimated. The core Council will meet periodically to hold 

hearings, commission research and call for specific actions-which can be 
endorsed by the eParliament and brought into national parliaments by MPs for 
immediate legislative action, backed by the moral power of the WFC."

World Social Forum 
http://www.forumsocialmundial.org.br/
	Forum Social Mundial.



About the Editors




Adriaan Boiten studied history and graduated from the Municipal University of 
Amsterdam in 1986. He served for 12 years in various municipal positions for 
historical preservation of the city. As the proprietor of a web design business 
he lives and works in the old inner city of Amsterdam.

Richard Stimson is an author and retired business professor in High Point, North 
Carolina. Educated at Yale, Florida International University, and the University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, his careers have spanned association 
management, public relations, university teaching, and computer operations.
